===== PAGE 1 =====
 
EN 
 
 EN 
 
 
EUROPEAN 
COMMISSION 
Brussels, 29.5.2019  
SWD(2019) 215 final 
 
COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT 
Albania 2019 Report 
Accompanying the document 
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the 
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions 
2019 Communication on EU Enlargement Policy 
{COM(2019) 260 final} 
 


===== PAGE 2 =====
 
1 
 
Table of Contents 
1.  
INTRODUCTION 
3 
1.1. 
Context 
3 
1.2. 
Summary of the report 
3 
2. 
FUNDAMENTALS FIRST: POLITICAL CRITERIA AND RULE OF LAW 
CHAPTERS 
5 
2.1. 
Functioning of democratic institutions and public administration reform 
5 
2.1.1  
Democracy 
6 
2.1.2. 
Public administration reform 
10 
2.2. 
Rule of law and fundamental rights 
14 
2.2.1. 
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights 
14 
2.2.2. 
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security 
31 
3. 
FUNDAMENTALS 
FIRST: 
ECONOMIC 
DEVELOPMENT 
AND 
COMPETITIVENESS 
44 
3.1. 
The existence of a functioning market economy 
44 
3.2. 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union 49 
4. 
 GOOD NEIGHBOURLY RELATIONS AND REGIONAL COOPERATION 
52 
5.  
ABILITY TO ASSUME THE OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP 
54 
5.1.  
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods 
54 
5.2.  
Chapter 2: Free movement of workers 
55 
5.3.  
Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services 
56 
5.4. 
 Chapter 4: Free movement of capital 
57 
5.5.  
Chapter 5: Public procurement 
58 
5.6.  
Chapter 6: Company law 
60 
5.7.  
Chapter 7: Intellectual property law 
61 
5.8.  
Chapter 8: Competition policy 
62 
5.9. 
Chapter 9: Financial services 
64 
5.10. 
 Chapter 10: Information society and media 
65 
5.11.  
Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development 
66 
5.12.  
Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy 
67 
5.13.  
Chapter 13: Fisheries 
69 
5.14.  
Chapter 14: Transport 
70 
5.15.  
Chapter 15: Energy 
72 
5.16.  
Chapter 16: Taxation 
75 
5.17.  
Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy 
76 


===== PAGE 3 =====
 
2 
 
5.18.  
Chapter 18: Statistics 
77 
5.19.  
Chapter 19: Social policy and employment 
78 
5.20.  
Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy 
81 
5.21.  
Chapter 21: Trans-European networks 
82 
5.22.  
Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments 
84 
5.25.  
Chapter 25: Science and research 
85 
5.26. 
 Chapter 26: Education and culture 
87 
5.27.  
Chapter 27: Environment and climate change 
89 
5.28.  
Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection 
92 
5.29.  
Chapter 29: Customs union 
93 
5.30.  
Chapter 30: External relations 
94 
5.31.  
Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy 
96 
5.32.  
Chapter 32: Financial control 
97 
5.33.  
Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions 
99 
ANNEX I – RELATIONS BETWEEN THE EU AND ALBANIA 
101 
ANNEX II – STATISTICAL ANNEX 
103 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 4 =====
 
3 
 
1.  
INTRODUCTION 
1.1. 
Context  
Albania has continued to implement the Stabilisation and Association Agreement and the 
meetings of the joint bodies under the agreement took place. In April 2018, the Commission 
recommended that the Council decides that accession negotiations be opened with Albania, at 
the same time encouraging Albania to maintain and deepen the current reform momentum, in 
particular in the key field of the rule of law. In June 2018, the Council set out the path towards 
opening accession negotiations in June 2019. Albania has continued to implement reforms 
that are crucial to the EU agenda, in particular delivering concrete results in the conditions 
identified in the Council Conclusions of June 2018 for the opening of accession negotiations. 
The Commission has continued to monitor thoroughly the developments in these areas. 
1.2. 
Summary of the report1 
As regards the political criteria, Albania has continued to make progress on its EU reform 
agenda throughout the reporting period. Strong polarisation persisted in the political sphere. 
Parliamentary activities were affected by a prolonged boycott from opposition parties, which 
then also relinquished en bloc their parliamentary mandates in February 2019. More than half 
of the relinquished parliamentary mandates have now been reassigned by the Central Election 
Commission and the quorum for the full functioning of Parliament is maintained. Main 
opposition parties decided not to register for the local elections, which are scheduled to take 
place on 30 June 2019. The main opposition parties’ disengagement has negatively affected 
the efforts for a bipartisan electoral reform despite the majority’s efforts to move forward. 
Opposition parties should constructively re-engage in the democratic institutions. 
Albania is moderately prepared in what concerns the reform of its public administration. 
Efforts continued in several related areas, resulting in some progress in the efficiency and 
transparency of public services delivery, improving the regulatory framework on impact 
assessment of policies, more transparent recruitment procedures, and the overall strengthening 
of the administration’s capacity to undertake merit-based civil service procedures. 
Consolidation of these achievements should advance further, to ensure a more efficient, 
depoliticised, and professional public administration. 
Albania's judicial system has some level of preparation. The implementation of 
comprehensive and thorough justice reform has continued consistently, resulting in good 
progress overall. The new institutions for the self-governing of the judiciary, the High Judicial 
Council, the High Prosecutorial Council and the Justice Appointment Council have been 
established, representing a crucial step in strengthening the independence and accountability 
of the judiciary. The temporary re-evaluation of all judges and prosecutors (vetting process) 
has advanced steadily, producing tangible results. Under the aegis of the European 
Commission, the International Monitoring Operation has continued to oversee the process. 
More than 140 files have been processed, resulting in 88 dismissals/resignations of 
magistrates from office and 53 confirmations. Most dismissals pertained to issues related to 
unjustified assets. These concrete and credible results have substantially strengthened the 
sector and consolidated independence, impartiality, professionalism, and accountability of the 
judiciary. 
Albania has some level of preparation in the fight against corruption. Good progress was 
made, notably with the adoption of the new Action Plan 2018-2020 for the implementation of 
                                                 
1 This report covers the period from March 2018 to March 2019. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including: contributions from the government of Albania, contributions from the EU Member States, European 
Parliament reports, and information from various international and non-governmental organisations.  


===== PAGE 5 =====
 
4 
 
the Inter-sectoral Strategy against Corruption, the amendments to the Law on the Declaration 
and Audit of Assets, the Law on Public Procurement as well as the adoption of the Code of 
Conduct for members of Parliament. The establishment of an Anti-corruption Task Force has 
increased the proactivity of administrative investigations. Direct access to databases for 
prosecutors and the police continued to improve. Good progress has continued through the 
strengthening of the track record on investigating, prosecuting and trying high level 
corruption cases. Concrete results in the fight against corruption include the vetting process 
which has led to the dismissal from office of a number of high-ranking magistrates, including 
at Constitutional Court and High Court level. The establishment of the High Prosecutorial 
Council (HPC) allowed the launch of the establishment of specialised anti-corruption bodies 
(Special Anti-Corruption and Organised Crime Structure – SPAK, National Bureau of 
Investigation – NBI). Once the vetting of candidates is completed, the bodies will become 
operational which will strengthen the overall capacity to investigate and prosecute corruption. 
However, overall, corruption is prevalent in many areas and remains an issue of concern.  
Albania has some level of preparation in the fight against organised crime. Police operations 
to dismantle criminal organisations have been intensified. Several police operations resulted 
in multiple arrests, and a number of important indictments and convictions took place. These 
operations resulted in the arrest and prosecution of known leaders of organised criminal 
groups. International police cooperation, especially with EU Member States, has also 
intensified, leading to a number of successful large-scale law enforcement operations. 
Consistently for the past years, Albania showed a strong commitment to counter the 
production and trafficking of cannabis. Albania allows an intrusive monitoring mechanism by 
an EU Member State (aerial surveys by the Italian Guardia di Finanza, co-financed by the 
EU) to be in place. In the past two crop seasons, aerial surveillance has certified that almost 
no cultivation of cannabis has taken place in Albania. These steps represent tangible progress 
in meeting last years’ recommendations on improving the track record. Efforts need to 
continue, in particular by tackling money laundering and confiscating assets stemming from 
crimes and other unjustified wealth.  
On fundamental rights, Albania complies overall with international human rights 
instruments and developed its legal framework in line with European standards. During the 
reporting period, Albania has made efforts to meet obligations that arise from international 
legal instruments. The overall implementation of those instruments remains, however, to be 
strengthened. Legal framework was improved in the areas of child’s rights and domestic 
violence. A new law on social housing was approved by the parliament in May 2018, which 
aims to strengthen the protection of the right to housing of the most vulnerable members of 
the Roma and Egyptian2 communities. Further efforts are needed in relation to the 
consolidation of property rights. As regards the freedom of expression, the overall legislative 
environment is conducive to the exercise of freedom of expression, but implementation 
requires further efforts. 
As regards the economic criteria, Albania has made some progress and is moderately 
prepared in developing a functioning market economy. Economic growth increased further 
and unemployment decreased but remains still high. Exports grew solidly and the current 
account deficit narrowed. The high public debt-to-GDP ratio continued to decrease but the 
pace of fiscal consolidation remained slow. Banks continued to reduce the number of 
non-performing loans and the use of foreign currency. The banking sector remained stable, 
though business credit growth did not pick up. Steps towards developing the financial market 
                                                 
2 In line with the terminology of European institutions, the umbrella term ‘Roma’ is used here to refer to a 
number of different groups, without denying the specificities of these groups. 


===== PAGE 6 =====
 
5 
 
have been taken. The business environment has improved only in some aspects. Progress in 
the implementation of comprehensive justice reform is expected to contribute to strengthening 
the business environment and attracting investments. Some progress was made on increasing 
labour market participation and the quality and effectiveness of labour market institutions and 
services, but the employment rate and labour market participation remain low, and the 
informal economy is still a significant job provider. 
Albania has made some progress and has some level of preparation in terms of capacity to 
cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union. Albania has made some 
progress in terms of energy, transport and digital infrastructure development, but lack of 
productive know-how, low education levels and technology transfers hinder Albania’s 
competitiveness and integration into international value chains. Exports and regional 
integration are below potential. Efforts to improve education and training show some results 
but reforms need to continue in particular to better address rural areas and vulnerable groups. 
Albania’s capacity for research, development and innovation remained very low. 
With regard to good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation, Albania has 
continued to participate actively in regional cooperation and maintain good neighbourly 
relations. Important steps have been taken to address bilateral issues with Greece. 
Albania continued to align its legislation to EU requirements in a number of areas, enhancing 
its ability to assume the obligations of membership. The country is moderately prepared in 
many areas, such as financial control, education and culture and statistics, or has some level 
of preparation, including in the areas of public procurement and trans-European networks. 
Albania will need to continue its efforts related to its overall preparations to adopt and 
implement the EU acquis. Adopting a comprehensive Public Internal Financial Control policy 
and coordinating its implementation with ongoing public administration and public finance 
management reform remains key towards a functioning system of internal control in public 
sector. Albania should continue work on the development of the transport and energy 
networks, and related connectivity reform measures, also with a view to improving 
connectivity throughout the region.  
The administrative capacity and professional standards of bodies charged with the 
implementation of the acquis need to be strengthened and the independence of regulatory 
bodies safeguarded. Enhancing transparency and accountability, in particular ensuring the 
effective, efficient and transparent functioning of the public procurement system and public 
finance management, remains essential. Albania has continued to fully align with all EU 
common foreign and security policy positions and declarations. 
With regard to migration, some progress was made in improving the institutional capacity on 
border management and asylum. Albania signed the European Border and Coast Guard Status 
Agreement with the EU in October 2018. Reception capacity to deal with mixed migration 
flows was further enhanced. The number of unfounded asylum applications lodged by 
Albanian nationals in the EU has decreased but remains high and requires continuous and 
sustained efforts, as well as to address the phenomenon of unaccompanied minors.  
2. 
FUNDAMENTALS FIRST: POLITICAL CRITERIA AND RULE OF LAW CHAPTERS 
2.1. 
Functioning of democratic institutions and public administration reform 


===== PAGE 7 =====
 
6 
 
2.1.1  Democracy 
The political environment remained polarised throughout the reporting period. The opposition 
carried out repeated boycotts of parliamentary activities. These culminated in the decision by 
the main opposition parties to relinquish their parliamentary mandate en bloc. This has led to 
delays in the electoral reform and the adoption of amendments to the Law on the Status of 
Judges and Prosecutors. More than half of the relinquished parliamentary mandates have now 
been reassigned by the Central Election Commission and quorum for the full functioning of 
Parliament is maintained. 
Elections 
The ad hoc parliamentary committee on electoral reform established in October 2017 held a 
number of technical meetings. This bipartisan body worked intermittently. However, no 
progress was made to address outstanding recommendations from the Office for Democratic 
Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in 
Europe (OSCE). A new ad hoc parliamentary committee has been established in October 
2018 to address the OSCE/ODIHR recommendations still outstanding from the last three 
rounds of elections (2013, 2015, and 2017). The committee has worked intermittently, under 
the chairmanship of representatives from the two main political parties, holding workshops 
and consultations. In the absence of cross-party consensus, unilateral proposals by the 
government majority were tabled in October 2018 and again in December 2018, but no 
decisions resulted.  
The President of the Republic has issued a decree for holding local elections on 30 June 2019. 
The Central Election Commission (CEC) launched the related preparatory activities. The CEC 
is still missing two members, which shall be appointed by the opposition, while the members 
proposed by the Socialist Party were elected in October 2018. The main opposition parties 
have decided not to present their lists of candidates for the upcoming local elections. The 
deadline for the registration of parties has now expired.  
Parliament 
Parliamentary activities were affected by a high degree of polarisation and a prolonged 
boycott by the opposition, which began in September 2018. In February 2019, with very 
limited exceptions, Members of Parliament (MPs) from opposition parties relinquished their 
mandate. The Assembly has continued to increase transparency by intensifying consultations 
with interest groups and the public, while increasing its role in initiating new — or amending 
existing — legislative proposals. Capacities for oversight and involvement of the Assembly in 
the EU integration process remain to be strengthened. The transparency and control of 
political party financing need to be improved.   
Strong polarisation and the opposition’s repeated boycott of parliamentary activities has 
negatively affected the Assembly’s work. Since September 2018, the opposition took part in 
very few parliamentary activities, mostly at committee level, and cross-party consensus was 
reached only on a limited number of laws (8). A joint resolution of the EU-Albania 
Parliamentary Stabilisation and Association Committee was adopted only in the first of the 
two meetings held during the reporting period (February and November 2018). The second 
session was marked by a walkout by the members of the opposition parties. In February 2019, 
the members of opposition parties relinquished their parliamentary mandate en bloc. The 
process of re-appointments through the CEC is ongoing.  
Replacements of MPs have respected gender quota provisions, resulting in a further increase 
of women in the Assembly. There are now 43 women in the Assembly (out of a total of 140 


===== PAGE 8 =====
 
7 
 
members). At present, 8 of the government’s 15 members are women (53%), and there are 13 
female deputy ministers (out of 31 deputy ministers in total, or 41%). Representation of 
women in municipal councils increased to 34.6% in 2015 (up from 12% in the 2011 local 
elections). In those 2015 elections, 10 women were elected as mayors (out of 61 
municipalities in total).  
During the reporting period, there were no issues leading to the opening of new 
‘decriminalisation’ dossiers. 
In February 2018, the Parliament set up a subcommittee on human rights, and in July 2018 it 
set up a subcommittee on the implementation of the vetting law in the Albanian State Police. 
In May 2018, the Parliament established an independent commission on enforcement of the 
law on justice-system governance bodies. The members of this commission were nominated 
only in November 2018.    
A code of ethics was adopted in April 2018 without support by the opposition and, in 
September 2018 the Parliament Bureau (a grouping of the chairs of parliamentary groups and 
commissions) approved a handbook on conduct in Parliament. These documents aggregate: (i) 
existing legal provisions providing guidance to MPs on legal and ethical issues, and (ii) 
measures for the registration and disclosure of finances, gifts, lobbying contacts, and conflicts 
of interest. Although these are non-binding standards, they are expected to be applied by MPs. 
Communication channels between citizens and MPs need to be formalised and strengthened. 
The Parliament adopted fewer acts compared to the previous reporting period. In spite of this, 
it continued to strengthen its contribution to legislative review through more legislative 
initiatives, amendments from MPs, and interest-group hearings. Urgent legislative procedures 
were used in about 10% of cases (6 times out of 66 laws), including two cases of laws on 
special financing agreements for public works. The Parliament accepted one presidential 
decree returning laws for parliamentary review and rejected two of such requests by the 
President.  
Parliamentary rules of procedure do not yet reflect the existing Law on the role of 
Parliament in the EU integration process. Parliament’s capacity to monitor the compliance 
of new legislation with the acquis and ensure implementation remains limited. Coordination 
with the executive needs to be improved. About 10% of overall legislative activity was aimed 
at partial alignment with the EU acquis (7 out of 66 laws). The EU Integration Committee 
held only two hearings during the reporting period. The National Council for European 
Integration still has to consolidate its role and guarantee broader involvement in EU 
integration issues.  
On Parliament’s oversight function, the work of inquiry committees remained highly 
polarised. The committees on telephone surveillance, on the case pertaining to a former 
Minister of the Interior, and on the privatisation and renationalisation of the electricity power 
distribution system operator did not lead to conclusive results. Other oversight mechanisms 
remained generally underused. In 2018, there were five ‘interpellations’ (formal enquiries by 
parliament) with ministers and two motions with debate. Parliament conducted a structured 
review of annual reports from independent institutions, including hearings at committee level, 
and adopted 21 resolutions. The mechanism for following up and monitoring 
recommendations by Parliament and independent institutions marked a step towards stronger 
oversight, but has yet to show results. The Assembly elected two heads and a number of 
members of independent institutions. The chair of the State Audit Institution and two CEC 
members remain to be appointed. 


===== PAGE 9 =====
 
8 
 
On transparency and accountability, the Parliament has ensured access to documents and 
activities. It has also held a number of thematic public meetings. The review of internal rules 
on the Parliament’s administration continues. Research staff and support to MPs and 
parliamentary groups remain limited.  
All positions of commissioners at the Ombudsman office were filled. The Ombudsman, the 
Commissioner for Protection against Discrimination and other independent institutions still 
face poor implementation of their recommendations by the Albanian administration.  
Political parties have partially adhered to OSCE/ODIHR recommendations on transparency 
of party funding. Further reform, including amendments to the Electoral Code, is required. 
Issues persist in relation to internal party democracy, transparency of party financing and due 
implementation of statutes.  
Governance 
The government remained committed to the EU integration process. In December 2018, the 
Prime Minister carried out a substantial reshuffle of the government. Nine cabinet positions 
were changed, including that of the Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister for Europe and 
Foreign Affairs. The replacement of the latter led to controversy between the Prime Minister 
and the President of the Republic on constitutional provisions regarding ministerial 
appointments. The restructuring of ministries and agencies has streamlined some existing 
structures, but has also created administrative gaps that must be overcome. The territorial 
administrative reform needs to be further consolidated as part of the wider decentralisation 
agenda. This is particularly necessary to guarantee local fiscal autonomy, ensure capacity 
building for staff, and empower municipalities to provide standard quality public services.   
EU integration has remained a key driving feature of the Albanian government’s actions. 
However, a persistently tense political situation and the opposition’s boycott in particular 
have hampered cross-party dialogue and inclusiveness for EU-related reforms. Political will 
to advance on the EU agenda needs to be combined with appropriate administrative capacities 
to align with the EU acquis. In particular, the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs - and 
line ministries responsible for the EU acquis - would benefit from further streamlining of staff 
and resources. Some positive steps have been taken to increase consultations with 
stakeholders and reach out to civil society groups, especially on the future structure for 
accession negotiations. The restructuring of the ministries, which began in September 2017, 
had an impact on the performance of the administration. Some gaps in administrative capacity 
and a certain lack of clarity in institutional responsibilities in various policy areas remain to be 
overcome. 
The ruling majority has established structures to improve government accountability, inviting 
citizens to submit their assessment through ‘co-governance platforms’. Implementation of this 
initiative should be pursued in ways that better allow preserving the distinction between party 
and government. 
In December 2018, following several weeks of student protests against the existing education 
system, the government announced a large reshuffle. The reshuffle affected nine government 
posts, including the position of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Europe and 
Foreign Affairs. Ministerial changes also involved the Minister of Finance, Minister of 
Education, the Minister of Transport, Energy and Infrastructure, the Minister of Agriculture, 
the Minister of Culture, the State Minister on the Protection of Entrepreneurship and the 
Minister for Relations with the Parliament. The replacement of the Minister for Europe and 
Foreign Affairs (as well as the earlier change of the Interior Minister in November 2018) led 
to a dispute between the Prime Minister and the President of the Republic. This dispute 


===== PAGE 10 =====
 
9 
 
centred on contrasting interpretations of the constitutional provisions on ministerial 
appointments between the Prime Minister and the President of the Republic. Given the 
presidential refusal to nominate the new Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, the Prime 
Minister took over the post, and delegated the acting functions to a deputy minister. 
The Constitutional Court has been unable to fulfil its mandate over most of the reporting 
period due to the absence of a quorum. The court should have nine members, but only one of 
its nine members is in office, due to resignations, retirements, and a vetting process that 
removed some of the sitting judges. The process to fill these vacant posts started after the 
creation of the new Justice Appointment Council (see section 2.2.1 Chapter 23: Judiciary and 
fundamental rights), as foreseen in the justice reform package. 
On local government, the territorial administrative reform (TAR) needs to be further 
consolidated as part of the wider decentralisation agenda. The government undertook a mid-
term review of the 2015-2020 national cross-cutting strategy for decentralisation and local 
governance. The Supreme State Audit Institution also carried out an assessment of the TAR 
and issued a report on it, in October 2018. The new legislation affecting local government is 
not yet fully harmonised and implemented. Most notably, while municipalities have been 
attributed larger powers, the adequacy of financial resources available to local government 
units (LGUs) are at risk. LGUs’ fiscal autonomy is also at risk. 73% of the LGUs’ budget 
comes from national transfers. The central budget allocates about 1% of GDP to LGUs, the 
lowest in the Western Balkans. In most municipalities, LGUs are not effective at collecting 
revenues. As a result, the overall ability of local institutions to deliver quality public services 
remains limited. Appointments not fully in line with all the principles of the civil service law 
have continued, hindering the establishment of a fully merit-based civil service.  
On public participation in local decision-making, further progress has been made by 
municipalities, especially in the area of participatory budgeting. However, the institutional 
framework for effective and inclusive participation needs further strengthening. The Agency 
for the Delivery of Integrated Services (ADISA) expanded its presence throughout the 
territory with its one-stop-shops. A parallel process to roll out ‘front desks’ for service 
delivery at the local level is ongoing. The definition of national minimum standards for 
services remains outstanding.   
On territorial planning, general local plans have been approved and budgeted for 45 
municipalities, and general local plans for the remaining 16 are budgeted for 
2019. Coordination of the national sectoral strategies with local plans is weak. On 
transparency, guidelines for disclosure of information to the public by local governments were 
adopted by the Commissioner on the Right to Information and Protection of Personal Data in 
September 2018. All municipalities in Albania now regularly publish decisions of their 
municipal councils online. The network of 61 EU local coordinators has strengthened the 
LGUs’ involvement in the EU accession process, raising more awareness of EU policies and 
the acquis. The so-called ‘EU desks’ in municipalities have been upgraded into structured 
units, based on a Council of Ministers decision of July 2018. A report on the performance of 
municipalities on EU matters was presented in April 2018.    
Civil society 
Progress is yet to be made on the implementation of the roadmap on an enabling environment 
for civil society. The Law on the National Council for Civil Society needs to be amended to 
reflect changes in ministerial portfolios and provide for appropriate representation in the 
National Council for Civil Society. Substantial efforts are needed to ensure meaningful and 
systematic consultations with civil society as part of an inclusive policy dialogue for reforms. 


===== PAGE 11 =====
 
10 
 
These efforts should involve comprehensive feedback and follow up mechanisms. The 
financial sustainability of civil society organisations remains a challenge due to fiscal and 
legal frameworks.  
Albania’s legal and regulatory framework on the right of freedom of association is generally 
in line with international standards. Nevertheless, the legal framework on free assembly needs 
improvement to clarify the different requirements for ‘notification’ versus ‘permission’ for 
free assembly. The law also needs to: (i) address the right to spontaneous assembly and 
counter assembly and (ii) make the procedures for notification more easy to complete and 
more accessible. The public consultation law requires reporting on how inputs by civil society 
organisations (CSOs) are taken into consideration. However, little evidence exists on the use 
and efficiency of the feedback mechanisms. The scope of the law should be amended to cover 
governmental decisions (sub-legal acts).  
The 2014 Law on Public Consultation laying down the procedural norms for transparency and 
public participation in decision-making is overall in line with European standards. The 
registration process continues to be problematic due to the high costs of registration, lengthy 
procedures and lack of specialised judges. No progress was made on public consultation in the 
adoption of sub-legal acts and the implementation of the laws on volunteerism and social 
enterprises. 
The National Council for Civil Society has organised regular meetings. The Law on the 
National Council should be amended to reflect changes in ministerial portfolios and their 
representation in the Council. There is a need to further increase the Council’s engagement 
with other civil society actors articulating CSOs’ opinions in the policy making processes. 
The revised roadmap on an enabling environment has not yet been approved.  
The Agency for the Support of Civil Society remains the main public body providing 
financial support for civil society. However, public funding is insufficient to sustain CSOs’ 
actions, in particular in the social services sector. No significant developments took place in 
the legal and regulatory framework of the relevant tax regime for CSOs, which remains an 
issue. This absence of a favourable tax regime represents a significant financial burden for 
CSOs, and the current legal environment does not support alternative funding sources. Tax 
incentives for corporate donations do not promote donations to CSOs, while no tax incentives 
are given for individual donations.  
2.1.2. Public administration reform 
 
Albania is moderately prepared with the reform of its public administration. Some progress 
was made in improving the quality of public services, strengthening the administration’s 
capacity to undertake merit-based recruitments, and upgrading the regulatory framework on 
impact assessments. Implementation of the public administration reform and public-financial-
management reform strategies has continued, although the reorganisation of ministerial 
portfolios and structures has affected its pace and effectiveness. Only partial progress was 
made on the Commission’s 2018 recommendations, which remain largely valid.  
In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
 build capacity and implement regulatory and budgetary impact assessments in all 
ministries to improve the quality and financial sustainability of legislative and policy 
proposals; 
 upgrade the regulatory framework on policy planning and monitoring, and roll out the 
integrated policy making system; 


===== PAGE 12 =====
 
11 
 
 develop and adopt a salary policy for civil servants and connect the human-resource-
management information system with the treasury to provide an automated payroll. 
Strategic framework for public administration reform 
Throughout 2018, the government has continued to monitor implementation of the 2015-2020 
public administration reform strategy and the 2014-2020 public-financial-management 
(PFM) reform strategy. In April 2018, it also published the third annual monitoring report. 
The implementation record of the public administration reform strategy has remained modest.  
The deputy prime ministers, who have been in charge of the overall reform, ensured 
continued political support for the reform. Coordination between the Prime Minister’s 
Office, the Ministry of Europe and Foreign Affairs, and the Ministry of Finance and Economy 
needs to be further strengthened. The prime minister’s office should play a greater role in 
steering policy processes and managerial accountability (see Chapter 32). The Integrated 
Policy Management Group on Good Governance (IPMG) was established in 2018 with two 
main aims. The first aim was to improve high-level policy dialogue among institutions, 
development partners and civil society. The second aim was to ensure a common monitoring 
and reporting framework for all related reforms. Financial sustainability needs to be 
improved, as the overall reform of public administration is still too dependent on external 
donor funding.  
Policy development and coordination 
The legal basis and the institutional set-up are partially in place to ensure a consistent 
policy-making system. The creation of a coherent strategic planning and monitoring system 
is being held back by: (i) weaknesses in the existing regulatory framework on medium-term 
policy planning and (ii) a lack of a dedicated central quality control function. Some progress 
was made in preparing the rollout of the Integrated Planning System Information System, an 
IT tool that should help to link strategic policy planning and budgeting. The government 
needs to step up efforts to upgrade administrative capacity in: (i) strategic policy planning and 
(ii) policy monitoring. These increased efforts should be made at both ministerial level and 
the level of the Prime Minister’s Office. 
The Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs prepares and monitors implementation of the 
national plan for European integration (NPEI). The rate of implementation of the NPEI 
remains low, at less than 30%, and the overall quality of policy planning remains weak. The 
government should step up efforts to establish functional inter-institutional co-ordination 
structures for more effective implementation of the NPEI at both political and administrative 
level.  
On inclusive and evidence-based policy and legislative development, the administration 
needs to further strengthen its capacity, particularly to harmonise the legislation with the 
acquis. Administrative data collection and its systematic use for policy and law-making 
should be improved across the administration. The government introduced a formal 
requirement to carry out regulatory impact assessment (RIA) on legislative proposals through 
amendments to the rules of procedure, approved in 2018. Full implementation of this 
requirement needs to be ensured in 2019. Stronger coordination is needed between the 
Ministry of Finance and Economy and the RIA unit in the Prime Minister’s Office. Public 
consultations are required for policy and legislative development, but methodological 
guidance and quality control is lacking. The electronic web-portal for public consultations is 
operational, but its use by the public remains limited.  


===== PAGE 13 =====
 
12 
 
Public scrutiny of government work remains limited. Most government reports on various 
policies continue to present implemented activities rather than explain the actual results and 
outcomes that have been achieved through the implementation of government policies. 
Coordination structures for monitoring policy implementation need to become operational 
through IPMGs. It is also necessary to ensure a less fragmented system on policy monitoring 
by streamlining the relevant legislative framework.  
Public financial management 
The Ministry of Finance and Economy, which leads the public financial management reform, 
underwent further restructuring in 2018. There are still several posts unfilled in the Ministry at 
present. Based on a mid-term review of the PFM strategy in 2018, priorities are currently 
being reassessed. The goal of this reassessment is to: improve budget planning and 
management; strengthen internal control implementation across government; prevent arrears 
at central and local government level; follow up on internal and external audit 
recommendations; improve investment planning and management; improve public 
procurement review and compliance with procurement rules; grant more institutions online 
access to the treasury; and analyse the fiscal risks of state-owned enterprises.  
Progress was achieved with the preparation of the 2018 and 2019 budgets and with the 
execution of the 2017 budget in line with the revised Organic Budget Law. Adherence to 
fiscal rules has improved, mainly thanks to the inclusion in the 2019 budget proposal of both a 
section on fiscal risks and a list of Public-Private-Partnerships (PPPs). The new public 
investment management (PIM) guidelines were adopted in March 2018. A campaign to 
combat the informal economy was implemented, and external audit manuals were piloted. 
(See also Chapters 5, 16, 29 and 32)  
Budget transparency has improved with the publication of all key budget documents on 
time. The 2019 budget, the citizens’ budget, and the list of public investments (including 
PPPs under the medium-term budget programme) have been published. Public participation in 
the budget process needs to be further strengthened. The 2017 budget implementation report 
was published. However, information on state assets contained in this report does not allow 
for a full comparison with the original budget.  
Public service and human resources management 
Due to a fragmented legislative framework, there are not yet uniform standards on merit-
based recruitment, promotion and dismissal across the whole public administration. The 
Civil Service Law (CSL) provides a solid basis for merit-based recruitment and promotion, 
which continued to improve in 2018 thanks to a centralised recruitment process. 92% of the 
planned vacancies in 2018 were filled, compared to 46.5% in 2017. Overall transparency and 
fairness of recruitment at the central level has improved thanks to refinements of the online 
application system, improved quality of examination procedures, and the use of electronic 
written tests. An ad-hoc selection procedure was used for the integration of highly qualified 
young graduates in the public administration. Notwithstanding merits in the objectives of this 
initiative, the relevant decision of the Council of Minsters should be brought fully in line with 
the principle of merit-based recruitment enshrined in the Civil Service Law. Proper 
implementation of the Civil Service Law requires more efforts at the local level, where many 
appointments have been made in breach of this law. There were 568 dismissals of civil 
servants in 2018, a slight increase compared to the 460 dismissals in 2017. This was mainly 
due to the reduction in the number of ministries. The backlog of court decisions confirming 
unlawful dismissal of civil servants was reduced. 


===== PAGE 14 =====
 
13 
 
The human resources management information system (HRMIS) is still not fully 
functional. The system now includes more data on public-service organisations and 
employees, but does not cover the whole civil service. The number of institutions that can 
generate payroll reports has increased, but the link between the HRMIS and the treasury’s IT 
system is not yet operational. The Commissioner for Oversight of the Civil Service needs 
more staff and more financial resources to better fulfil its responsibilities. The government 
needs to step up efforts to establish a coordination mechanism on human resource 
management between central and local level. These efforts should include extension of the 
HRMIS to the local level and systematic oversight at the local level. 
The remuneration system is based on a job classification system, which needs to be further 
reformed. There is no coherent salary policy that would establish clear criteria for pay 
supplements and salary increases. This means that it is a common practice for salary increases 
for certain positions to be awarded through a decision of the Council of Ministers. This 
impairs the fairness and coherence of the system. Salary supplements are not awarded in a 
uniform manner across institutions. Salary increases are not linked to the promotion and 
performance appraisal system.  
The training programmes implemented by the Albanian School of Public Administration 
contribute to the professional development of civil servants. However, an integrated training 
management cycle remains to be established. The School’s budget in 2018 has been reduced 
compared to 2017, although the number of training courses has increased. Local-level civil 
servants receive very little training. A law is in place that prevents corruption and ensures the 
integrity of public officials and civil servants. However, institutional capacity for verifying 
assets and assessing conflict-of-interest declarations should be reinforced.  
Accountability of the administration 
The legal framework on the organisation of the central administration duly regulates 
accountability lines between institutions. However, this legal framework lacks clarity on the 
creation of administrative bodies that are sub-ordinated to ministries, the parliament and 
prime minister. Some subordinated bodies are already being reorganised, but new agencies 
are still being set up without any strategic planning. Recruitment to these new agencies is 
mostly regulated outside the scope of the civil service law. Managerial accountability within 
institutions is still focused on processes rather than the achievement of results, and there is 
little delegation of decision-making to top and middle management. (See Chapter 32). The 
government needs to step up its efforts to develop a long-term strategy on accountability by 
ensuring appropriate supervision and reporting lines between ministries and subordinated 
agencies.  
Citizens’ right to good administration is limited. Public institutions do not systematically 
implement the recommendations of oversight bodies. The number of implemented 
recommendations from the Ombudsman remains low. The Law on the Right to Information 
regulates citizens’ right to access public information. An increasing number of public 
authorities have adopted transparency programmes. However, public institutions need to 
make more efforts to pro-actively disclose information of public interest. The capacity of the 
Commissioner for the Right to Information and Protection of Personal Data to oversee the 
process needs to be increased. There is already a central registry on information requests, but 
it needs more funding. 
The legislative framework for the right to administrative justice is in place. The capacity of 
the administrative court system to deal with the backlog of cases has improved at the 
first-instance level, but a backlog persists at the appeal-court level since Albania has only one 
administrative court of appeal. The capacity of appeal boards to process cases remains weak. 


===== PAGE 15 =====
 
14 
 
The legislation for protecting the right of citizens to seek compensation is in place, but court 
cases remain rare due to the public’s limited awareness of their rights. Due to the lack of data 
collection, the effectiveness of the liability regime cannot be assessed. 
Service delivery to citizens and businesses 
Institutions and laws on public-service delivery are in place to ensure citizens’ user-oriented 
administration. Three important documents have been adopted: a guide to standardise 
service delivery, a citizens’ charter that explains the organisation of the public service, and an 
ethics manual for service desks. The Agency for the Delivery of Integrated Services has 
started measuring user satisfaction, and has continued to set up one-stop-shops across the 
country. E-services, such as online payment of taxes, have been further developed. 
Information on public services is more accessible to citizens. 
The Code of Administrative Procedures provides the legislative framework for simplifying 
administrative procedures. However, legal uncertainty for citizens and businesses 
continues, as there have been delays in adopting the necessary implementing legislation and 
amending the sectoral policy legislation. This is due to the weak capacity of the Ministry of 
Justice to coordinate and promote implementation of the new law and the weak capacity of 
line ministries to harmonise  sectoral legislation that contradicts provisions in the Code of 
Administrative Procedures. Training is needed to upgrade the capacities of the administration 
to both harmonise and effectively implement the legislation. 
2.2. 
Rule of law and fundamental rights 
2.2.1. Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights 
The EU’s founding values include the rule of law and respect for human rights. A properly 
functioning judicial system and an effective fight against corruption are of paramount 
importance, as is respect for fundamental rights in law and in practice.  
Albania has some level of preparation in implementing the acquis and European standards in 
this area. Good progress was made, in particular through the further determined  
implementation of far-reaching justice reforms (which included the establishment of the 
institutions for the self-governance of the judiciary) and the continuation of tangible results in 
the vetting process. All the vetting priority cases were finalised in first instance and a number 
of appeals were also completed. To date, over 280 vetting dossiers have been processed, 
leading to decisions on more than 140 assessees. The legislative framework has been 
strengthened to fight corruption more effectively. Operational efforts against high-level 
corruption have started to bring some concrete results. However, corruption is prevalent in 
many areas and remains an issue of concern. There has been further progress in enforcing 
human rights, strengthening the institutional and legislative framework for the protection of 
children’s rights, tackling gender based violence and the protection of vulnerable groups, in 
particular the Roma and Egyptian communities.  
Functioning of the judiciary 
Albania has some level of preparation. Good progress has been made through continued 
implementation of the justice reform. The re-evaluation of all judges and prosecutors has 
advanced steadily and delivered substantial results. The number of magistrates having left the 
judicial system, through dismissals and resignations (88), is higher than the number of 
confirmations in office of existing magistrates (i.e. existing magistrates who passed the 
vetting process), which is currently at 53. The outcome of thorough vetting has affected the 
pace of setting-up the new judicial institutions. Due to the outcome of the vetting, the new 
bodies for the self-governance of the judiciary (the High Council of Justice, the High 


===== PAGE 16 =====
 
15 
 
Prosecutorial Council, and the Justice Appointment Council) were formed in December 2018. 
Dismissals due to vetting have resulted in several vacancies at other key institutions, in 
particular at the High Court level. The Constitutional Court has lost its quorum, with only one 
judge out of nine remaining in office. The new bodies for the self-governance of the judiciary 
are taking the necessary steps to address this ongoing transition. On the other 
recommendations from the 2018 report, making more effective use of an improved case 
management system remains outstanding.  
In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
 further advance the process of re-evaluating judges and prosecutors (moving on with 
appeals is expected to consolidate a jurisprudence on the most critical issues of the 
re-evaluation process); make progress in the recruitment of new magistrates to fill the 
positions made vacant by the vetting; 
 complete the set-up of specialised investigative and judicial bodies against corruption and 
organised crime, and consolidate the structures of the newly established institutions for the 
self-governing of the judiciary; 
 continue to pursue a sector-based approach to the justice reform under the cross-cutting 
strategy for 2017-2020 and ensure adequate governance, monitoring and reporting 
mechanisms through well-developed structures, methods and indicators coupled with 
adequate financial support for implementation of the reform. 
The comprehensive transitional re-evaluation process (vetting) of all judges and prosecutors 
has continued steadily. The vetting has been implemented thoroughly, with the overall 
objectives of strengthening professionalism across the sector; eradicating corruption; 
consolidating independence and impartiality; and, ultimately, rebuilding public confidence in 
the judiciary. The vetting institutions have continued to build their investigations on the basis 
of the three pillars provided for in the law: proficiency assessment; asset verification (which is 
performed on all assessees, as well as on all their close relatives for wealth accumulated in 
Albania and abroad); and links to organised criminal networks. The vetting process is carried 
out under the independent oversight of an international monitoring operation, which has been 
deployed under the aegis of the European Commission. The international monitoring 
operation follows the work of all vetting institutions: the Independent Qualification 
Commission (IQC), the two Public Commissioners, and the Appeal Chamber.  
To date, investigations on 280 assessees have been initiated (out of the 800 magistrates that 
will undergo vetting). In total, more than 140 dossiers have been processed, leading to 88 
dismissals/resignations and 53 confirmations in office. The International Monitoring 
Operation (IMO) has consistently performed its oversight role in the vetting process. The 
IMO has issued opinions on first-instance assessments, including seven recommendations to 
appeal first-instance decisions of confirmation. All were followed up by the Albanian vetting 
institutions.   
Strategic documents 
The cross-sectoral justice strategy for 2017-2020 and its action plan were adopted in 2016. 
Parts of the earlier action plan have already been implemented. The estimated budget for its 
implementation is EUR 98 million, of which 35% is provided by international donors. The 
establishment of appropriate monitoring, evaluation and reporting mechanisms is still 
pending. A monitoring body has been appointed within the Ministry of Justice, and it 
presented its third monitoring report in November 2018. In May 2018, the Parliament 
established an independent commission for the coordination, monitoring, and enforcement of 


===== PAGE 17 =====
 
16 
 
the Law on Justice System Governance Bodies. The members of this independent commission 
were eventually nominated in November 2018.    
New judicial governance bodies 
The new High Judicial Council, a separate High Prosecutorial Council, and the Justice 
Appointment Council started to perform their functions in January 2019.  
Independence and impartiality 
The principles of impartiality and judicial independence are set out in the Constitution and 
reflected in the laws on the governance of the judiciary and on the status of judges and 
prosecutors. The reform has given prosecutors greater autonomy and reduced the 
centralisation of the system around the General Prosecutor. Judges and prosecutors cannot be 
transferred without their consent. Exceptions concern disciplinary measures, structurally 
justified changes or temporary needs. Judges can be dismissed only for serious misconduct or 
if sentenced for a criminal offence. The dismissal decision may be appealed at the 
Constitutional Court. 
Attempted interference with the judiciary, including by authorities within the judiciary, has 
been an issue  and needs to be addressed beyond the vetting process. The allocation of cases 
should be conducted randomly by lot and electronically. However, the electronic case 
management system has shown many shortcomings. Random allocation of cases to 
prosecutors is partially used, but prosecution offices often fail to make full use of the system 
and produce reliable data. The laws provide for strict procedures in case of undue influence 
over a court case or when judges consider their independence to be jeopardised. 
Accountability 
The Code of Ethics for judges and prosecutors is now regulated by law and is no longer a 
non-binding document produced by the National Conference of Judges. The High Judicial 
Council and the High Prosecutorial Council are now responsible for approving the ethics rules 
and code of conduct and for monitoring them. The High Justice Council has improved 
evaluation forms and adapted these forms to the new legal standards. However, the 
performance of judges continues mostly to be measured on the basis of numbers of 
complaints and final court convictions. Until the High Justice Inspector (HJI) is established, 
the High Judicial Council and the High Prosecutorial Council should continue to investigate 
disciplinary misconduct. Based on the latest reform, disciplinary proceedings have to be 
initiated and conducted by the High Justice Inspector and no longer by the Minister of Justice. 
However, the Minister of Justice retains the right to submit a complaint and to ask the HJI to 
carry out investigations on prosecutors. 
The recruitment process for the School of Magistrates has been improved with the inclusion 
of an integrity test and a psychological assessment of the integrity and moral standards of 
candidates. Judges and prosecutors are obliged to declare their assets on an annual basis. 
Provisions should be adopted to address the current lack of legal definitions for the list of 
misconduct for judges and prosecutors. Previous provisions addressing these definitions were 
repealed by the Constitutional Court decision on the Law on Status. 
Professionalism and competence 
The system for recruiting, selecting, appointing, transferring and dismissing judges and 
prosecutors has improved. Constitutional and legal changes have reduced political influence 
during the appointment process, ensuring a merit-based career system. 


===== PAGE 18 =====
 
17 
 
The High Court has currently only three members exercising their functions, and is awaiting 
new appointments from the High Judicial Council. Former members have mostly resigned 
after the termination of their mandate and one judge was dismissed after being found guilty of 
corruption. Five members were dismissed at the first-instance level of the vetting procedure 
and three were confirmed. However, two of the confirmation cases have been appealed by the 
Public Commissioner. The newly appointed High Judicial Council is expected to fill all open 
vacancies at the High Court. Appointments to the Constitutional Court are ongoing. The new 
Justice Appointment Council has set in motion the process to appoint the eight vacant 
Constitutional Court judges, as well as of the High Justice Inspector. The General Prosecutor 
should be elected following a proposal by the High Prosecutorial Council and approval by a 
qualified majority in Parliament. While the appointment process is ongoing, a Temporary 
Prosecutor General remains in office. The responsibilities of the temporary General 
Prosecutor are limited under the law. 
Quality of justice 
Albania had 358 full-time judges (12 per 100 000 inhabitants) and 336 full-time prosecutors 
(11 per 100 000 inhabitants) in 2018. According to the European Commission for the 
Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ), the European average is 21 judges/11 prosecutors per 100 000 
inhabitants. The 2017 budgetary plan for the justice sector was EUR 98 million, while in 2018 
it was raised to approximately EUR 100 million, with a 14% increase. This amounts to 
approximately EUR 5.3 per inhabitant. The new justice institutions and the vetting process are 
supported by a budgetary plan of EUR 12 million. Court infrastructure remains poor overall 
and future budget allocations should take this aspect into account. 
 Some hearings continue to be held in judges’ offices, as spending on court premises has not 
been prioritised due to the establishment of the new judicial institutions.  
The School of Magistrates is responsible for the initial and continuous in-service training of 
judges and prosecutors. The training needs are identified by the School in cooperation with 
stakeholders within the judiciary. The new legislation expanded the School’s responsibilities, 
which now also include training legal advisers at all court levels, court chancellors, court 
administrators and state advocates. However, the School continues to rely heavily on donors’ 
support and has limited capacity in terms of premises, academic staff, and qualified 
specialised trainers. A structured needs assessment and proper evaluation mechanism should 
also be developed to strengthen the overall effectiveness of the School with more adequate 
financial and human resources.  
The School of Magistrates has not managed to attract enough candidates, resulting in only 10 
candidates passing the entry exam for the academic year 2018/19. One of these successful 
candidates withdrew and another one was dismissed at first-instance level in the vetting 
process. The Parliament failed to adopt transitional provisions allowing for a doubling in the 
number of students for the 2018/19 academic year, which were necessary back then since the 
two new councils for the self-governance of the judiciary had still to be formed. The 
amendments could not be adopted since the boycott by the opposition of plenary sessions 
prevented the Law on the Status of Judges and Prosecutors to be revised with the necessary 
qualified majority. The newly formed High Judicial Council and High Prosecutorial Council 
set the number of candidates to be admitted in the 2019/20 academic year at 75. The first 53 
have already been selected.  
The High Judicial Council monitors and evaluates court activities on a monthly basis. All 
courts are required to send a monthly report to the High Judicial Council. They are also 
required to produce annual activity reports. All courts have websites, which are publicly 
accessible, although the data is not always fully updated due to lack of capacity. This is also 


===== PAGE 19 =====
 
18 
 
affected by the lack of full functionality in the electronic case management system, which 
thus far did not produce reliable and coherent statistical information. A new modern, 
centralised and unified case management system is being developed with donors’ support, but 
remains to be established.  
The impact of alternative dispute resolution continues to be low. The total number of cases 
referred to and solved through mediation was 2 077 compared with 1 260 in 2016. 
Efficiency 
There is still a lack of consolidated reporting on the efficiency of the justice system. 
Efficiency of the justice system is affected by issues such as the length of proceedings, the 
clearance rate, and the number of pending cases at all court levels including the Constitutional 
Court. The clearance rate is lowest for the appeal courts, particularly for the Appeal 
Administrative Court (37%). This is due to a high number of appeals and the low number of 
judges allocated to the Court. The highest clearance rate (100%) is in the first-instance court 
of serious crimes.  
Dismissals and resignations resulting from the vetting process have created vacant positions 
in the judiciary. This increased the backlog in cases, in particular at the High Court level, 
where the current backlog is approximately 30,000 pending cases. The Constitutional Court 
repealed the provisions of the Law on Status regulating the rights for retirement for judges 
and prosecutors. Revised ‘repairing’ provisions remain to be adopted to clarify the age of 
retirement for judges and prosecutors.  
There are 205 related applications pending at the European Court of Human Rights. 
Changes in the procedural codes under the reform have provided for improved legal 
provisions on the length of proceedings. A human-resources strategy should also be 
developed by the High Judicial Council. However, correct implementation of these improved 
legal provisions requires more training for judges and advocates.  
In addition to the overall length of court proceedings, the execution of court decisions remains 
a cause of concern. Since the introduction of the private offices’ service, enforcement of court 
decisions has improved. However, the enforcement of monetary claims against the state 
should be improved further. Success fees should be more proportionate to the final value of 
the immovable property at the end of the enforcement procedure, rather than its initial value. 
The centralised electronic system into which all enfacement cases should be registered is not 
yet functional. The system should also be effective and accessible for other related agencies, 
such as notaries and the Immovable Property Registration Office.  At the same time, 
enforcement officers should have access to existing state-run registers and databases on 
assets, such as immovable property. Further amendments in the procedural laws are necessary 
to ensure the timely implementation of decisions, particularly for territorial powers linked to 
the residence of the debtor.  
Fight against corruption 
Albania has some level of preparation in the fight against corruption. Good progress has 
been made, notably with the adoption of the new action plan 2018-20 for the implementation 
of the Inter-sectoral Strategy against Corruption; the amendments to the Law on the 
Declaration and Audit of Assets; the Law on Public Procurement; and the adoption of the 
Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament. Although the vetting of members of the 
judiciary is an administrative process, progress in this area is relevant to assess Albania’s 
concrete results in fight against corruption. Improvements are still expected to the Law on 
political party financing, the Electoral Code and the Law on Conflicts of Interest. The 


===== PAGE 20 =====
 
19 
 
establishment of an Anti-corruption Task Force has increased the proactivity of administrative 
investigations and is already producing its first concrete results. Good progress has continued 
through further consolidating efforts towards the establishment of a solid track record on 
investigating prosecuting and trying high-level corruption cases.  
The recommendations of the last annual report were partially implemented. Efforts should 
continue towards consolidating a track record of seizure and confiscation/recovery of criminal 
assets resulting from corruption-related offences. The ongoing establishment of specialised 
anti-corruption investigative and judicial bodies remains crucial. Direct access to databases 
for prosecutors and the police continued to improve. Overall, corruption is prevalent in many 
areas and remains an issue of concern. There is awareness at political level of the need to 
effectively address corruption. The justice response against high-level corruption has started 
to generate concrete results, which needs to continue. 
In the coming year, Albania should therefore: 
 further progress towards establishing a solid track record of seizure and 
confiscation/recovery of criminal assets resulting from corruption-related offences; further 
increase the use of financial investigations; 
 finalise the procedures for the establishment of the specialised anti-corruption bodies, 
composed of the Special Anti-Corruption and Organised Crime Structure (SPAK), the 
National Bureau of Investigation (NBI), and the Court to address high-level corruption; 
ensure adequate resources and cooperation between these new structures; 
 continue to improve access to national electronic registries for law enforcement 
authorities.  
Track record 
On the track record of investigations, prosecutions and convictions in the fight against 
corruption, the overall positive trend of recent years continued. However, further efforts are 
needed to consolidate this trend, as shown by some statistical data. In particular, the number 
of final convictions involving junior or middle-ranking officials has slightly decreased 
compared with the previous reporting period (there were 289 such convictions in 2018 
compared with 331 in 2017). The overall number of referrals to prosecution has also slightly 
decreased (2 126 in 2018 and 2 342 in 2017). 
On convictions of high-level state officials, the judiciary has achieved some good initial 
results. In 2018, one Appeals Court judge was sentenced by the Serious Crime Court (case 
currently at appeal level) and one prosecutor was sentenced by the Court of Appeal for 
Serious Crimes (case currently at the Supreme Court). There were 102 new cases against 
high-level state officials sent to prosecution in 2018 (7 persons indicted), this has been an 
increase compared to 61 in 2017 (10 persons indicted). However, these frequent 
investigations in recent years have so far not resulted in a substantial number of final 
convictions of high-ranking state officials. This risks fostering a culture of impunity. 
In February 2019, 12 officials and former officials of the Ministry of Justice were arrested for 
suspected abuse of office and violation of equality in tenders during the period 2016-17. The 
officials include a former secretary general of the Ministry of Justice. 
Although the vetting of members of the judiciary is an administrative process, it is relevant 
for assessing Albania’s concrete results in fight against corruption. Of the more than 140 
magistrates who underwent vetting so far 88 have been dismissed from office, mostly for 
issues related to unjustified assets, or resigned. These results have been crucial to restoring 
public trust in the judiciary. Institutional support has been crucial to the progress made and 


===== PAGE 21 =====
 
20 
 
confirms the strong commitment of all relevant authorities in Albania to eradicate corruption 
in the judiciary. Among the high-ranking judges and prosecutors that have been dismissed 
through the vetting to date, it should be noted that eight out of nine Constitutional Court 
judges and 15 out of 18 High Court judges have been dismissed through the vetting or have 
resigned. This represents a significant number of cases involving high-level state officials.  
On asset declarations by high-level state officials, the number of cases referred by the High 
Inspectorate of Declaration and Audit of Assets and Conflicts of Interest (HIDAACI) to the 
prosecution has increased: 27 cases were referred in 2018 and 22 cases in 2017. In 2018, eight 
high-level officials (four of whom were heads of commune and one of whom was a head of 
municipality) were convicted, compared to five in 2017 (including one head of commune and 
two customs officials). In total, HIDAACI referred 53 low- and mid-ranking officials to the 
prosecution services in 2018 (of which 17 resulted in final convictions). This is an increase 
compared to the 32 referrals resulting in 14 final convictions in 2017. 
Seizure and confiscation of criminal assets are not systematically ordered and carried out in 
corruption-related cases. Risk assessments have been piloted in some sectors (Customs 
Administration, General Inspectorate), and should be further expanded. Establishing a solid 
track record of investigations, prosecutions and final convictions in corruption cases remains a 
long term objective to be further consolidated. 
Some progress was made in setting up an interface between the different electronic 
case-management systems of the police, prosecution and courts. However, the electronic 
case-management system of the courts needs a technical update before further progress can be 
achieved. 
Implementation of the Law on whistle-blowing and whistle-blower protection continued. At 
both central and local level, 163 units responsible for protecting whistle-blowers and for 
reporting cases to HIDAACI have been established. In 2017, 446 units responsible for the 
protection of whistle-blowers were established across private companies. In 2018, 16 external 
reporting cases were registered and investigated by HIDAACI, compared with eight in 2017.  
On internal control mechanisms, the newly established Anti-corruption Task Force carried 
out 70 inspections leading to 108 dismissals from the civil service and 36 criminal referrals. 
The State Supreme Audit Institution referred 41 cases, including high-level officials, to 
prosecution. The rate of implementation of the State Supreme Audit Institution’s general 
recommendations by public institutions remains low. 
On access to information, the Commissioner for Information and Data Protection received 
820 complaints and issued 37 decisions in 2018, while 560 complaints were received in 2017. 
A system was established and installed in 27 public institutions to record the overall number 
of requests made and to enable citizens to submit online requests for public information. 
The impact of anti-corruption measures in particularly vulnerable areas (customs, tax 
administration, education, health, public procurement etc.) remains limited. There is still a 
strong and urgent need to improve and strengthen internal checks and inspection mechanisms 
within the public administration. There is also a need to improve their cooperation with law 
enforcement authorities. 
Institutional framework 
Prevention of corruption 
The capacity of the anti-corruption network in line ministries, at local level and in the Office 
of the National Coordinator against Corruption (NCAC) needs to be further strengthened. The 
Ministry of Justice, which serves as the new NCAC since September 2017, is currently vested 


===== PAGE 22 =====
 
21 
 
with the role of the Secretariat of the Inter-ministerial Coordinating Committee for the 
Implementation of the Strategy, established in 2018. The Inter-ministerial Committee is 
chaired by the Minister of Justice and is composed of 10 deputy ministers representing their 
respective ministries. The newly established Anti-corruption Task Force is responsible for 
inter-institutional inspections and has started to produce positive results. Coordination 
between the new structures and the Council of Ministers’ Unit for Transparency and 
Anti-Corruption as well as the Integrated Policy Management Group has to be consolidated. 
The impact of the anti-corruption structures on preventing public sector corruption remains 
unclear. 
The role of HIDAACI in detecting conflicts of interest and checking asset declarations was 
strengthened by the adoption of the Law on whistle-blowing and whistle-blower protection 
and the implementation of the vetting process. An online asset declaration system is being 
installed and tested and will be used fully as of January 2020.  
The role of the State Supreme Audit Institution in the overall anti-corruption framework 
should be strengthened to identify and effectively address systematic weaknesses. The 
inspection capacity in public procurement needs to be further improved. E-procurement is 
expected to achieve more transparency and reduce opportunities for abuse. 
The Council of Europe’s Group of States against Corruption (GRECO) has published its 
Second Compliance Report (fourth round) on Albania in July 2018, and concluded that 
Albania had dealt satisfactorily with only four of the 10 recommendations. Albania should 
now prioritise the implementation of the remaining six recommendations. Albania had 
implemented satisfactorily or dealt in a satisfactory manner with all 12 recommendations 
from the third round. 
Integrity-related secondary legislation is in place but an overall integrity risk-management 
system has yet to be established. No integrity plans have been developed yet for ministries but 
a ‘Manual of Ethics on Public Service Delivery’ has been adopted. 
A new online portal has been created to promote ‘co-governance’ with citizens. Since 2017, 
33 336 citizens’ complaints against the public administration have been registered. Out of 
28 565 cases related to the central government, 27 335 were resolved, leading to 300 
dismissals.  
Law enforcement 
Specialised bodies in charge of investigating, prosecuting and sanctioning corruption are 
being set up. These include an investigative body (NBI), a specialised prosecution office, and 
a specialised court (SPAK). The process is advancing based on the foreseen legal deadlines. 
The Special Prosecution Office has performed a preliminary verification of the fulfilment of 
the eligibility criteria of all the candidates for the SPAK. The High Prosecutorial Council has 
already submitted the list of candidates to the Independent Qualification Commission, which 
is carrying out the relevant vetting investigations.  
Police and prosecution have been granted direct access to additional private and public 
national registries, including 22 key national registries, through a central task force. This has 
improved the capacity of law enforcement authorities to operate, and has also made 
investigations more efficient. Concerns remain over high staff turnover and insufficient 
inter institutional cooperation. The overall resources of law enforcement authorities need to be 
strengthened.  
Legal framework 


===== PAGE 23 =====
 
22 
 
Albania is party to all international anti-corruption conventions, including the United Nations 
Convention Against corruption. It has continued to improve its legal framework on the 
prevention and combatting of corruption. The Code of Conduct for members of Parliament 
adopted in April 2018 has strengthened the rules on conflicts of interest; declarations of 
private interests; limitations on outside activities whilst in office; acceptance of gifts; contacts 
with lobbyists and third parties; post-employment restrictions; and standards on conduct 
during parliamentary and non-parliamentary activities. The Law on the Declaration and Audit 
of Assets, Financial Obligations of Elected Persons and Certain Public Officials was further 
amended in December 2018, making it possible to use the online declaration system. The Law 
on Conflicts of Interest needs to be further improved. A Law on lobbying remains to be 
adopted. The legal framework on whistle-blower protection still needs to be aligned with the 
new EU acquis on this issue. 
The latest amendments to the Law on political party financing provide for the publication of 
financial reports on the election campaigns of political parties, election campaign monitoring 
reports and financial audit reports. However, further amendments to the Law on political party 
financing are necessary, as well as to the Electoral Code. Amendments to the Criminal Code 
introducing a clear definition of ‘high state official’ have yet to be adopted. All the secondary 
legislation for the legal framework on integrity is in place but it remains highly complex and 
fragmented. While Albania has an increasingly comprehensive legal framework, effective and 
high-quality implementation should be prioritised. 
Strategic framework 
The implementation of the Inter-sectoral Strategy against Corruption is overall on track, 
although weaknesses remain. These weaknesses include the need to strengthen ownership, 
strengthen institutional capacities, ensure proper costing of the strategy’s measures and ensure 
harmonisation with the ongoing actions in the anti-corruption sector (including donor 
activities). A new action plan for 2018-20 for the implementation of the strategy was 
approved in April 2018, but it should be reviewed to include a detailed costing of the 
measures. According to the 2018 draft annual monitoring report, 53 activities out of 97 
planned have been realised (54%) while 17 are ongoing. In 2017, out of 191 planned 
activities, 52% were fully implemented, and 31% were partially implemented. The monitoring 
mechanism and its accountability need to be strengthened. There should be consultations with 
the relevant stakeholders before the approval of the reports. Feedback should also be 
systematically provided to the stakeholders who participate in developing anticorruption 
policies.  
A comprehensive performance assessment framework has been finalised, and reporting on the 
performance indicators is for the first time included in the annual monitoring report for 2018. 
The lack of human and financial resources for implementing the measures and reporting on 
progress remains a concern. 
Fundamental rights 
Albania complies overall with international human rights instruments and has ratified most 
international conventions related to the protection of fundamental rights. It has yet to ratify 
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the 
Optional Protocol to the International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. 
During the reporting period, Albania made efforts to meet obligations that arise from 
international legal instruments. However, the overall implementation of those instruments 
needs to be strengthened. The legal framework was improved in the areas of children’s rights 
and domestic violence. A new Law on Social Housing was approved by the Parliament in 
May 2018, which addresses shortcomings in the field of housing and forced eviction. This law 


===== PAGE 24 =====
 
23 
 
creates a quota for 5% of housing to be reserved for the most vulnerable members of the 
Roma and Egyptian communities. Adoption of secondary legislation on minority rights is 
ongoing. Efforts are ongoing to consolidate property rights and shall be further pursued. 
In the coming year, Albania should: 
 further improve institutional mechanisms for protecting children, protecting victims of 
domestic violence, guaranteeing gender equality and providing minimum health and social 
services, especially at the local level;  
 step up efforts to establish solid anti-discrimination case-law; enact the sub-legal acts 
related to the Law on Social Housing, which also foresees 5% of housing to be reserved 
for the most vulnerable members of the Roma and Egyptian communities; 
 swiftly adopt the full package of secondary legislation related to the 2017 framework Law 
on the Protection of National Minorities; 
 further consolidate the entrenchment of property rights, notably by advancing the revision 
of property deeds, implementing the compensation scheme, and making the necessary 
progress on the digitalising and mapping of property. 
Albania complies overall with international human rights instruments and has ratified most 
international conventions. It has yet to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol to the International Convention 
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. Albania has made efforts to address human rights 
and to fulfil the obligations that arise from international legal instruments. However, the 
implementation of such instruments should be improved. Assessing the level of 
implementation of policies, analyses and strategies remains a challenge due to the absence of 
comprehensive monitoring and data. It is therefore important to develop comprehensive 
reports and critical analysis. An inter-institutional action plan (2018-2020) on the 
implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 1325 was adopted in September 2018. 
Albania underwent its third Universal Periodic Review cycle in May 2019. Albania is in the 
process of becoming an observer to the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights. 
Albania continues to ensure good cooperation with the European Court of Human Rights. 
Between 1 January and 31 December 2018, the Court delivered nine judgments on Albania, 
seven of which found that Albania had violated rights guaranteed by the ECHR. The majority 
of cases are related to the right to a fair trial. On 20 September 2018, the Committee of 
Ministers of the Council of Europe decided to close the examination of 16 cases on the Driza 
Group and Manushaqe Puto. 
On the promotion and enforcement of human rights, the Ombudsman has been awarded 
‘A’ status by the Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions since 2014. During 
the reporting period, all five vacant positions for Commissioners have been filled. In 2018, the 
Ombudsman submitted a total of 171 recommendations, of which 93 were accepted, 17 were 
rejected, five went without response, and 56 remain in process. Effective implementation of 
the Ombudsman’s recommendations by the public administration remains to be strengthened 
and made more systematic.  
In October 2018, the Ombudsman launched an online mobile application to which citizens 
can submit complaints about human rights violations and corruption. In November 2018, the 
Ombudsman launched an ex-officio administrative inquiry into the new ring-road demolition 
case, noting that central and local government bodies had failed to address earlier 
recommendations on similar demolitions. The Ombudsman called for the planned demolitions 
to be preceded by consultations with the affected residents, and also recommended that the 


===== PAGE 25 =====
 
24 
 
necessary construction permit should be issued before this infrastructure project is allowed to 
proceed. 
A comprehensive targeted approach is necessary to strengthen the capacities of the 
Ombudsman and of the Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination in handling cases 
of human rights violations. This will include ensuring an appropriate budget for the former. In 
this regard, guidance is provided by the European Commission’s Recommendation on 
standards for equality bodies, adopted on 22 June 2018. 
On the right to life, following a visit to the country in December 2016, the UN Working 
Group on Enforced or Voluntary Disappearances (WGEID) issued several recommendations 
for Albania to address the crimes committed during the communist regime. A cooperation 
agreement with the International Commission for Missing Persons (ICMP) was signed in July 
and ratified by the Albanian Parliament in November 2018, allowing the ICMP to start 
collecting DNA samples with financial support from the EU. 
On the prevention of torture and ill-treatment, the National Preventive Mechanism 
conducted 51 inspections in 2018, resulting in 51 recommendations. During this period, two 
complaints of violence in police facilities and penitentiary institutions were processed. The 
European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) visited the country in February 
2017 and subsequently published a report. Particular attention was paid to the treatment and 
conditions of detention of persons in police custody and the situation of remand prisoners and 
forensic psychiatric patients. The recommendations issued by the CPT have only been 
partially implemented by the Albanian authorities. As recommended by the CPT and the 
European Commission, the government has started preparing plans for the establishment of a 
special institute for the treatment of persons with mental illness in prison. Preparation of these 
plans should be accelerated. In November 2018, the Ombudsman carried out an inspection at 
the Burrel prison. The Ombudsperson reiterated that this correctional facility should be closed 
because of its poor state. 
On the prison system, a strategic action plan to improve detention conditions was  adopted in 
2014 but its implementation was not monitored. A new action plan is currently being drafted 
for 2019-2022. Legislation on prisons and prison police should be amended to ensure 
compliance with European standards. With the opening of the new EU-funded prison in 
Shkodra, there has been some progress in addressing overcrowding in prisons. In total, the 
number of inmates decreased by 8%. During the reporting period, the newly appointed 
director of the Prison Directorate was dismissed on corruption charges. Several former prison 
directors and prison police officers have also been charged, and are under investigation for 
abuse of office and corruption. Training for prison personnel was carried out by the Ministry 
of Justice and the Ministry of Interior. There was also training for prison personnel as part of 
EU and Council of Europe projects.   
The use of alternatives to custody has increased compared with the previous reporting period. 
There were 6 171 cases of non-custodial alternatives in 2018 and 4 904 in 2017. The use of 
electronic monitoring has been suspended since 2017 because of a legal dispute. The 
specialist monitoring of convicts by the Probation Service slightly decreased from 85 in 2017 
to 82 in 2018.  
On the protection of personal data, the capacities of the office of the Commissioner for the 
Right to Information and Data Protection need to be adequate to perform its tasks effectively. 
In 2018, the Commissioner received 170 complaints from data subjects, carried out 190 
administrative inspections, issued 30 decisions, and imposed 61 administrative sanctions, 
which represent an increased activity compared to 2017. Further efforts are needed to align 
the personal data protection legislation with the General Data Protection Regulation 2016/679 


===== PAGE 26 =====
 
25 
 
and the Police Directive 2016/680. Albania has not yet signed or ratified the 2018 Protocol 
amending the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic 
Processing of Personal Data. 
Freedom of thought, conscience and religion was generally upheld, and there continued to 
be good relations overall between religious affiliations and practices. However, the restitution 
of properties belonging to religious groups remains an issue. The government allocated EUR 
880,000 to support the five official religious communities in May 2018. The religious 
communities – the Muslim Community, the Orthodox Church, the Catholic Church, the 
Bektashi Community and the Evangelical Fraternity – have jointly expressed strong public 
support for Albania’s EU integration process. In May, the religious communities in Albania 
signed a joint statement pledging their engagement in interreligious dialogue. The 
Interreligious Council, a forum for the country’s religious leaders to discuss shared concerns, 
has increased its activities. In April, the head of the Russian Orthodox Church, Patriarch Kirill 
of Moscow and All Russia, paid his very first visit to the country.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Freedom of expression 
The country has some level of preparation / is moderately prepared in the area of freedom 
of expression. There was limited progress over the reporting period. Threats and intimidating 
language against journalists have increased, although these acts have been systematically 
condemned. There have been some convictions on past and current cases. During the 
reporting period, financial resources and staff levels at the audio-visual media regulator were 
reinforced. The new Code of Ethics for journalists was launched in March 2018 and 
incorporates ethical guidelines for online media. The overall legislative environment is 
conducive to the exercise of freedom of expression, but implementation of this legislation 
remains a challenge. Ownership of audio-visual media and the transparency of media funding 
and public advertising remain key issues. Self-regulation in online media needs to be ensured. 
Legislation on public advertising needs to be introduced to improve transparency in line with 
international best practices.  
In the coming year, Albania should in particular:  
 ensure implementation of the Labour Code and strengthen the protection of Albanian 
journalists’ labour and social rights; 
 bring the legal requirements for transparency of media ownership and its limitations into 
line with international standards; 
 introduce legislation in line with international best practice on public advertising to 
increase transparency. 
Intimidation of journalists 
During the reporting period, there were two cases of physical assaults against journalists, 
reported respectively in June and September 2018. In addition, in August bullets were fired on 
the parental home of an investigative journalist, while a television programme moderator 
received a threat in December. Media associations and public authorities resolutely 
condemned these attacks. Investigations were launched, but there have been no arrests on 
these cases so far.  
In May, a politician was convicted in relation to a defamation case involving a journalist, 
while a first instance court dismissed a defamation case against two investigative journalists. 
A total of 13 cases in which journalists or newspapers were parties in the judicial process 


===== PAGE 27 =====
 
26 
 
were registered in first instance courts in 2018 with 10 first instance court rulings. In addition, 
there were 7 cases registered in appeal courts in 2018 with 1 ruling. Albania should further 
strengthen its efforts to ensure a policy of zero tolerance for intimidation of journalists and 
threats against the media, including in political discourse. 
Legislative environment 
The Constitution and relevant laws are in line with international human rights law. They 
guarantee individual liberties, including the right to privacy and freedom of expression. They 
also include sanctions against incitement to hatred. Defamation remains a criminal offence, 
although it does not carry a prison sentence. However, journalists convicted of defamation are 
at risk of fines. In December 2018, the government announced a package of amendments to 
the Law on Audiovisual Media and the Law on Electronic Communications, and a public 
consultation on these amendments was held in January 2019. It is important that the opinions 
of the relevant stakeholders, including the media sector, are taken into account before any 
new measure is adopted. Specific concerns have also been raised by the international 
community. Among others, these concerns included the scope of the definition of electronic 
publication, the extent of the domain registration obligation, and the implications of failure to 
register. The package of amendments is currently being reviewed for alignment with the EU 
acquis and European standards. Albania still needs to introduce legislation strengthening 
transparency in public advertising. 
Access to information about procurement contracts, audits and salaries of officials should be 
strengthened. Decisions of the Commissioner for the Right to Information are non-binding on 
public administration officials. 
Implementation of legislation/institutions 
The Audio-visual Media Authority (AMA), the regulatory authority in the field of audio 
and visual broadcasting services, approved its 2017-19 strategic action plan in March 2017. 
The funding of the AMA has been doubled, and it has changed its structure to focus more 
strongly on supervisory and inspection activities to identify illegal broadcasting. The AMA’s 
activities are subject to parliamentary oversight by the Committee on Education and Public 
Information Means. 
The new deadline set by the AMA for the digital switchover process is September 2019. The 
infrastructure to access digital broadcasting is generally already in place. However, the AMA 
has postponed the deadline of the digital switchover in Tirana and Durres due to the scarcity 
of DVB-T2 digital decoders on the market and the associated public discontent. These events 
indicated a shortcoming in the AMA’s role in the management of the process as well as a lack 
of public awareness about the digital switchover.  
Public service broadcaster 
The public broadcaster RTSH has a new internal structure that reflects the digital switchover 
process. RTSH has developed and approved editorial principles to guard against political 
interference. RTSH still needs to ensure its financial sustainability. 
In June 2018, private broadcasters pushed for changes to the Audio-visual Media Law, which 
would have allowed for part of the TV licence fee to be diverted from the public broadcaster 
to private TV channels. The proposed amendments were opposed by international actors, the 
public broadcaster, and media organisations. The initiative was rejected by the government.  
Economic factors 


===== PAGE 28 =====
 
27 
 
Oversaturation of the media landscape and opaque media ownership create concerns about 
fair competition for independent media organisations. The editorial direction of private media 
continues to be the subject of political and business interests. Media funding remains key to 
improving media freedom, especially given new challenges such as fake news and third-party 
influence.  
Self-censorship and the precarious nature of employment for journalists remain issues of 
concern. 
Internet 
In October 2018, the regulatory Authority for Electronic and Postal Communications (AKEP) 
warned that 44 online portals would be shut down if they were not registered within 72 hours 
with the National Business Centre and if they failed to publish their respective tax 
number/business registration number. As mentioned above, the recently proposed 
amendments to the media law legal framework include the obligation of online media 
registration, the scope of which remains to be clarified.  
Professional organisations and working conditions 
Job security for journalists needs to be strengthened. Media owners do not formalise work 
contracts and the Labour Code needs to be properly implemented for journalists. A recent 
survey supported by the EU indicates that employment in the media sector continues to be 
problematic, with one third of respondents stressing that they do not currently have a work 
contract. More than half of the respondents claimed that the salary they received was lower 
than the average salary in the public sector and the same proportion complained of delays in 
receiving their salaries in a timely manner. Delays that last for several months are regularly 
reported. The AMA, together with the Parliamentary Media Committee, is pressuring the 
authorities to properly implement the Labour Code for journalists. However, institutional 
steps to ensure this implementation need to be more concrete. 
(See also Chapter 10 - Information society and media) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Freedom of assembly and association are provided for in the Constitution and legislative 
framework and are broadly in line with international standards. Assemblies are regulated by 
the Law on Assemblies which, although largely in line with the Guidelines on Freedom of 
Peaceful Assembly of the OIDHR, needs to address the right to spontaneous assemblies and 
counter–assemblies. During the reporting period, freedom of assembly and association were 
generally respected. However, incidents have been registered in some protests and political 
demonstrations. 
Issues of labour and trade union rights are further covered in Chapter 19 - Social policy 
and employment. 
On property rights, progress has yet to be made towards improving the legal framework for 
registration, expropriation and compensation. In February 2019, the Parliament approved the 
Law on Cadastre. Albania should conclude first registration of property titles in all its 
territory. The decision on the registration and management of land located in the coastal area 
adopted by the government in November 2018 and contested by stakeholders has been 
amended. There are 572 cases pending before the ECtHR, most of which are related to 
property and due legal process in property-related cases. On 20 September 2018, the 
Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe issued a Resolution in which it decided to 
close the monitoring of the Driza group and Manushaqe Puto cases. The total fund for 
compensating property owners amounts to approximately EUR 700 million. Around EUR 17 


===== PAGE 29 =====
 
28 
 
million have already been disbursed. Further progress is dependent on the budget allocation 
for integrated land management and on follow-up legislation. Prior to the creation of the State 
Cadastre Agency, the Agency for the Treatment of Property treated 3 000 applications in the 
course of 2018, while 6 950 are still pending. 
On non-discrimination, the policy and legal framework is generally aligned with EU 
standards. The Law on protection against discrimination does not address the concept of 
multiple discriminations. The implementation of the anti-discrimination legal framework 
needs to be strengthened by the continuous provision of specialised training to judges and 
prosecutors. In 2018, the Commissioner for Protection against Discrimination (CPD) handled 
an increased number of cases of alleged discrimination (205 cases handled in 2018, against 
173 in 2017), out of which 179 complaints and eight ex-officio. The Commissioner 
participated in 66 judicial proceedings (53 in 2017) and imposed seven penalties (against 11 
in 2017). The local offices of the CPD, opened in three main cities, are now fully operational. 
The capacity of the CPD has been strengthened with additional staff and with an increased 
budget. Laws on hate speech are in line with international standards. Three cases of hate 
speech were registered during the year, and related complaints were submitted to the CPD on 
minority, gender and sexual orientation grounds. Awareness campaigns were organised across 
the country, but much remains to be done to eliminate the stigma of being discriminated 
against, particularly in rural and remote areas. 
The effective implementation of the national strategy and action plan 2016-2020 on gender 
equality is hampered by a persistent funding gap. At central level, the deputy Prime Minister 
has been nominated as the National Coordinator for Gender Equality. More efforts are 
required to ensure that the gender equality mechanism is fully operational and that all sectoral 
strategies at central and local level are gender mainstreamed and apply gender responsive 
budgeting. In July 2018, Albania progressed in tackling gender-based violence by amending 
the Law on Measures against Violence in Family Relations. The changes introduced are in 
line with the Istanbul Convention and the Convention on Elimination of all forms of Violence 
against Women. The law has strengthened protection measures for survivors of violence. It is 
important that implementation of the new legislative framework starts swiftly, as domestic 
violence remains a serious concern. In 2018, there was evidence of 4 951 cases of domestic 
violence. In 1 914 cases, the required investigative and procedural acts were referred to the 
prosecution office to initiate criminal proceedings. 608 alleged perpetrators were arrested, 77 
were detained, and 688 prosecuted at large. 541 cases of other criminal offences related to 
family relationships were reported. In 2018, 60 women and girls were identified and referred 
to relevant services as victims or potential victims of human trafficking. While the number of 
local referral mechanisms for reporting gender-based violence has increased to 39 
municipalities out of 61, efforts should be stepped up to set up and make these referral 
mechanisms functional in all municipalities. There are several women’s organisations that 
operate shelters for victims of domestic violence, but they have limited hosting and financing 
capacity. Women from disadvantaged and marginalised groups, such as Roma and Egyptian 
women, are often unaware of their rights and how to access services, including shelters. 
Effective implementation of the free legal aid system and the promotion of legal awareness 
and empowerment will be essential to ensure women’s access to justice. In September 2018, 
the government adopted its first national action plan to transpose UN Security Council 
Resolution 1325 on women, peace, and security. During 2018, Albania’s parliamentary 
subcommittee on gender equality and its Women Caucus continued to step up efforts in the 
area of gender equality legislation. A new health and psychosocial centre for victims of sexual 
abuse is now open and its service delivery standards have been adopted.  


===== PAGE 30 =====
 
29 
 
On the rights of the child, the adoption of the Law on the Rights and Protection of the Child 
in 2018 constituted a major step in improving the legal framework for child protection. This 
new law requires a multi-sectoral preventive and responsive approach to all forms of violence 
against children. Several by-laws have also been adopted. The mandate of the State Agency 
on Child Rights and Protection (a dedicated state institution under the Ministry of Health and 
Social Protection) has now been reinforced. This constitutes an opportunity to build a strong 
child protection system in Albania. However, the resources awarded to this institution, both 
financial and human, do not correspond to its increased legal responsibilities. Moreover, the 
fact that social protection and child protection fall under the mandates of two different 
government agencies does not allow for a comprehensive approach to the implementation of 
the national childcare reform. Coordination between these bodies as well as the local 
governments and the Commissioner for Children’s Rights should be improved. In October 
2018, the Parliament of Albania adopted legal amendments to the country’s civil registration 
law. The aim of these amendments was to remove barriers to birth registration and reduce the 
risk of childhood statelessness in Albania, particularly for children of Albanian parents born 
outside the country and for children of the Roma and Egyptian communities. 
The National Council on the Rights and Protection of the Child was created in 2018. Concrete 
measures to implement child protection legislation have been planned as part of the National 
Agenda on Child Rights 2017-20, which contains clear objectives and budgeted activities. 
However, little action has been taken so far to implement these actions. Currently, there are 
223 child protection workers in total (52% of the required number) out of which only 45 
(26%) work full-time. The new law requires all child protection workers to have a background 
in social work. However, currently only 78 out of 223 (35%) have such experience. 
There is growing evidence of child abuse and exploitation through the internet. Three 
ministries (Interior, Health and Social Protection, and Education) adopted a national action 
plan in 2018 to address these issues. However, capacities for investigation and prosecution of 
crimes against children committed through the internet need to be strengthened. The 
phenomenon of child marriage/union is still prevalent, particularly in Roma, Egyptian and 
rural communities. There is a lack of data and reporting on child poverty. 
The legislative and policy framework on juvenile justice was strengthened with the approval 
of the National Justice for Children Strategy (2018-21) in September 2018. The strategy 
covers implementation of the Criminal Justice for Children Code. The strategy is based on the 
government’s budgetary programmes. Implementing the new strategy and the Criminal 
Justice for Children Code adopted in 2017 will require a shift in administrative culture, 
considerable capacity building, specially adapted infrastructure, the establishment of 
community services, and inter-disciplinary/inter-institutional coordination at the central and 
local level. There are still structural gaps in juvenile justice in Albania. In February 2019, 
there were 31 juveniles in the Kavaja detention centre for minors. 
Albania’s framework legislation on the rights of persons with disabilities is partially 
compliant with the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. However, 
Albania has yet to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities. Persons with disabilities continue to face difficulties in accessing education, 
employment, healthcare and social services and in participating in decision-making. There are 
also widespread difficulties in removing environmental and infrastructural barriers that hinder 
mobility. Since the adoption of the law on inclusion and accessibility in 2014, only three 
by-laws have entered into force, while most of the secondary legislation still needs to be 
adopted. Despite efforts to ensure inclusive education, the quality of education for disabled 
children, especially deaf children, is a cause for concern. Children with disabilities are still 
placed in residential care centres. The number of assistant teachers for children with 


===== PAGE 31 =====
 
30 
 
disabilities in the pre-university education system increased to 944 in the 2018/19 school year 
(compared to 700 at the end of the 2017/18 school year), but these assistant teachers need 
further tailor-made training. The number of children with disabilities in the education system 
has reached 4336, out of which only 652 children or 15% attend special schools. The 
assessment of disabilities is still based on an outdated medical model, but a new bio-psycho-
social model of disability assessment is being piloted in two administrative units of Tirana 
with a view to reform the assessment system countrywide. Monitoring of how disability-
related measures are being implemented is hampered by a lack of data. 
Despite the fact that the Constitution does not include references to sexual orientation and 
gender identity, Albania's anti-discrimination legislation prohibits discrimination against 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons. However, more efforts 
are needed to protect LGBTI persons from discrimination when it comes to access to health 
care, education, justice, employment and housing. In 2018, 10 members of the transgender 
community sought asylum abroad due to severe discrimination. The national action plan for 
LGBTI persons (2016-2020) lacks a budget and is yet to produce visible results. An inter-
ministerial team responsible for monitoring the action plan in Albania is operational and held 
its last meeting in January 2019 to take stock of implementation. Police officers, prosecutors 
and gender ‘focal points’ in line ministries have been given training on preventing 
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity. The donor-funded 
shelter for LGBTI persons has continued to provide care, support and advocacy to homeless 
LGBTI individuals. During the reporting period, there were no court rulings in cases related 
to sexual orientation and gender identity. In addition, public awareness and acceptance of 
LGBTI persons remain low, particularly in rural areas. Hate speech and discriminatory 
language continue to be a problem in the media, especially online media. In March 2018, a 
hate-speech campaign against the LGBTI community developed on social media, with the 
active participation of members of the Parliament and a former minister. Despite strong 
statements from the international community, the response of equality bodies and state 
institutions was limited compared with the gravity of the campaign. 
On procedural rights, the new Law on Legal Aid broadens the category of persons that 
benefit from legal aid, and introduces primary and secondary legal aid concepts. The rights of 
victims were strengthened through amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code in May 2017. 
Nevertheless, the legal aid scheme still needs to develop an outreach mechanism and promote 
access to its services. A directorate for free legal aid within the Ministry of Justice was 
supposed to be established by the end of October 2018 but this has not materialised. There 
continue to be reports of obstacles to access to justice and a lack of access to legal aid for 
vulnerable groups, including Roma, Egyptians, persons with disabilities, and persons with 
economic difficulties. The vast majority of cases involving vulnerable groups are still handled 
by civil society groups with donor support. 
Albania demonstrated a strong commitment to promoting and protecting minority rights 
through the adoption of the framework Law on the Protection of National Minorities in 
2017. However, Albania still needs to swiftly adopt the full package of related secondary 
legislation, in line with European standards. These steps are necessary to ensure 
implementation of all the principles and rights enshrined in the framework law, including the 
right to free self-identification, the use of minority languages, and the right to education in 
minority languages. As of May 2019, 5 bylaws related to the package have been approved. 
The adoption of the remaining bylaws is scheduled to be finalised by June 2019. The 
implementation of all the secondary legislation will require strengthening the capacity of the 
State Committee on National Minorities and providing sufficient financial resources. In 
October 2018, the Council of Europe’s Advisory Committee on the Framework Convention 


===== PAGE 32 =====
 
31 
 
for the Protection of National Minorities adopted its fourth Opinion on Albania, which was 
published in March 2019. Concerns have been raised by the Greek minority in relation to 
property rights in the southern coastal area. 
The implementation of the 2016-2020 national action plan for the integration of Roma and 
Egyptians is ongoing. The fourth policy dialogue seminar on inclusion of Roma and 
Egyptians took place in December 2018, and made a number of recommendations to be 
implemented throughout the coming 2 years. The structure of the Ministry of Health and 
Social Protection, in charge of the coordination of Roma-related policies, needs to be 
strengthened. In recent years, there has been a positive overall trend in Albania in the field of 
education. This is particularly the case with regard to compulsory education enrolment of 
Roma children aged 7-15 years (currently at 66%) and compulsory education completion 
(43%) by Roma. However, the gap between Roma/ Egyptians and other non-Roma children 
living in the same areas remains significant. Roma children continue to benefit from free 
textbooks and transportation to remote schools. Segregation in schools remains an issue that 
should be systematically addressed. The overall employment and labour force participation of 
Roma remains very low (over 56% of economically active working-age Roma are 
unemployed). Informal employment among Roma accounts for 62% of total Roma 
employment. There is a need to review the national employment approach because it is not 
producing the expected results.  Health insurance coverage for Roma in Albania remains low 
and gaps persist between Roma and the majority population. A new Law on Social Housing 
was approved by the Parliament in May 2018, which addresses shortcomings in the field of 
housing and forced eviction. The law requires a  quota of 5% of housing to be reserved for the 
most vulnerable members of the Roma and Egyptian communities. The related sub-legal acts 
still need to be enacted. In 2018, there were 424 Roma families that benefited from projects to 
improve housing conditions (508 in 2017). Albania is still the country with the region’s 
lowest rate of access to piped water (46%) and electricity (84%) by the Roma population. 
Legal amendments to the country’s civil registration law in October 2018 have allowed the 
regularisation of 157 unregistered children. Overall access to public services for Roma 
remains difficult, particularly in rural areas. An electronic data collection system, ROMALB, 
is operational and used by all local governments. 
On citizens’ rights, in January 2019 Albania took steps to amend the Law on Citizenship, 
which would potentially establish an investors’ citizenship scheme. Such schemes pose risks 
as regards security, money laundering, tax evasion, terrorist financing, corruption and 
infiltration by organised crime. As a candidate country, Albania should refrain from any 
measure that could jeopardise attainment of the EU's objectives, when using its prerogatives 
to award nationality. 
2.2.2. Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security 
Albania has some level of preparation / is moderately prepared in implementing the 
acquis in this area. Some progress was made in improving the institutional capacity on 
border management, asylum, countering terrorism and violent extremism. Albania signed a 
European Border and Coast Guard status agreement with the EU. Reception capacity to deal 
with mixed migration flows was further improved. Organisational changes in law 
enforcement agencies introduced in the previous reporting period were implemented. The 
number of unfounded asylum applications lodged by Albanian nationals in the EU has 
decreased but remains high and requires continuous and sustained efforts. These efforts 
should include addressing the phenomenon of unaccompanied minors.  
In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 


===== PAGE 33 =====
 
32 
 
 further develop the systematic use of parallel financial investigations when dealing with 
organised crime, illicit trafficking, terrorism, and money laundering;  
 implement the recommendations of the report from the Council of Europe’s Committee 
of experts on the evaluation of anti-money laundering measures and financing of 
terrorism (Moneyval) on preventing money laundering and countering terrorism 
financing; 
 further step up measures to address effectively the problem of unfounded asylum 
applications in the EU through addressing the ‘push factors’ behind it, improving border 
checks and organising information campaigns on the rights and obligations of visa-free 
travel, continuing the relevant cooperation and dialogue with the most affected EU 
Member States. 
Fight against organised crime 
The country has some level of preparation in implementing the acquis in this area. Good 
progress was made in meeting last year’s recommendations. Police operations to dismantle 
criminal organisations have been intensified. In recent years, Albania has consistently shown 
a strong commitment to counter the production and trafficking of cannabis. Albania allows 
airborne monitoring by an EU Member State (aerial surveys by the Italian Guardia di 
Finanza, co-financed by the EU). In the past two crop seasons, aerial surveillance has found 
that almost no cannabis has been cultivated open-air in Albania. International police 
cooperation, especially with EU Member States, has also intensified, leading to a number of 
successful large-scale law enforcement operations. These steps represent tangible progress in 
meeting last years’ recommendations on improving the track record on fighting organised 
crime. The ‘Power of law’ special task force has promoted stronger police/prosecutor 
cooperation, which should also be expanded to other relevant agencies and bodies. Some 
progress was also made on aligning relevant legislation with European standards and best 
practices, and on seizures of criminal assets. Efforts need to continue to ensure increased 
prosecutions and final convictions, and more effective destruction of cannabis stockpiles. 
More efforts are needed to tackle money laundering and confiscate assets stemming from 
crime and other unjustified wealth. 
In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
 make further tangible progress in effectively dismantling organised crime groups, issuing 
deterrent sentences, taking away the proceeds of their crimes through asset confiscation, 
and addressing money laundering; 
 establish or designate an asset recovery office/agency in line with the EU acquis that is in 
charge of the identification and tracing of criminal assets; 
 adopt a new strategy and action plan on drugs, fill-in the legislative gap on drug 
precursors, and intensify the fight against the trafficking of hard-drugs; 
 adopt a cybercrime strategy and establish a more effective law-enforcement response 
focusing on the detection, traceability and prosecution of cyber criminals. 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
There are 10 145 officers in the Albanian State Police (ASP), equivalent to 374 officers per 
100 000 inhabitants, compared with the EU average of 318 per 100 000 people in 2016 
according to Eurostat. Albania reorganised its police structures in March 2018, separating 
management and administrative functions from operational and investigative ones. The 
reorganisation also merged relevant sectors, such as those dealing with money laundering and 


===== PAGE 34 =====
 
33 
 
criminal assets. The restructuring involved the reallocation of human, logistics and financial 
resources. Albania should establish or designate a specialised structure (asset recovery office) 
in line with the EU acquis that is in charge of the identification and tracing of criminal assets. 
This should further increase the effectiveness of the national asset recovery system and 
facilitate operational cooperation with asset-recovery offices in EU Member States. In 
December, the ASP law was amended to allow for the recruitment of military personnel. All 
the army ranks are now administratively equal to police ranks. The recruitment of military 
staff could have an impact on the career and promotion system within the ASP.  
The multi-disciplinary special task force set up in the framework of the ‘Power of law’ action 
plan was operational throughout 2018. Within the task force, cooperation between the ASP 
and the General Prosecution Office (GPO) has proven to be efficient. The proactivity of law 
enforcement has been improved and its ability to conduct parallel financial investigations has 
increased. The legal framework has been further aligned with the acquis. Albania has a 
robust legal framework for confiscation of criminal proceeds. Some legal amendments on 
unjustified wealth have not yet been adopted. These include the introduction of the concept of 
extended confiscation and of legal financial ceilings in cash transactions; the admissibility of 
suspicious transactions reports as evidence in court; and the establishment of a central registry 
of bank accounts. The Law on weapons is partially aligned with EU provisions. Albania has 
yet to harmonise its legislation with the latest acquis developments in this area. 
The Law on re-evaluating (vetting) officers of the ASP, Republican Guard, and Service for 
Internal Affairs and Complaints at the Ministry of Interior was approved in March 2018 and 
amended in March 2019. The evaluation will be based on personal integrity, professional 
capacity and verification of officers’ assets, and will affect around 12 000 officials. 
Approximately 250 officers of all ranks have already resigned before this vetting began. In 
January 2019, the government allocated funds for the salaries and expenses of the vetting 
bodies. In February 2019, the selection board finalised the list of candidates for the External 
Evaluation Commission and the Technical Secretariat. On the strategic framework, Albania 
has a cross-cutting strategy on organised crime, illicit trafficking and terrorism (2017-2020). 
It also has an action plan on the fight against organised crime (the ‘Power of law’ action 
plan). The new strategy and action plan on the fight against trafficking in human beings for 
2018-2020 was approved in December 2018. 
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
On Albania’s track record for investigations, indictments, and convictions on organised 
crime, in 2018 and the first quarter of 2019 there was an increasing number of large-scale 
police operations, targeting organised crime groups. These operations were also helped by 
closer cooperation with EU Member States. Several police operations resulted in multiple 
arrests, and a number of important indictments and convictions took place. These operations 
resulted in the arrest and prosecution of known leaders of organised criminal groups. In 
November 2018, the first instance Serious Crimes Court sentenced an Albanian criminal 
leading a structured criminal network. In January 2019, a major police operation resulted in 
the arrest of an Albanian national who was wanted for being the alleged leader of a well-
known criminal group. The subject is now facing charges for participation in a criminal 
group, drug trafficking, and money laundering. In February 2019, a joint operation between 
Albanian and Italian law enforcement authorities against four criminal groups resulted in the 
arrest of 27 people (21 of whom were Albanians) for drug trafficking. In March 2019, the 
Serious Crimes Court issued a final decision on a criminal organisation that in 2017 trafficked 
2.5 tonnes of drugs to Italy. In May 2019, one of the biggest drug traffickers in Albania was 
sentenced to 10 years of imprisonment for drug trafficking, participation in a criminal group, 
concealment of assets and money laundering. In the same month, Albanian and Greek law 


===== PAGE 35 =====
 
34 
 
enforcement agencies carried out a coordinated operation against an organised criminal group 
involved in international drug trafficking. The operation resulted in 61 arrests, of which 26 
were made in Albania. Another police operation followed few days later, whereby thirteen 
people were arrested as part of a criminal group involved in drug trafficking from Albania to 
Greece.  
Overall, the number of new cases related to criminal organisations and structured criminal 
groups referred to prosecutors increased from 34 in 2017 to 51 in 2018. However, the number 
of final convictions remains very limited. In 2017, there was one case with eight final 
convictions, while in 2018 there were two cases with five final convictions. On indictments 
for organised crime, there were seven in 2017 and five in 2018. There are still several cases 
every year that are initially reported as organised crime cases, but subsequently transferred to 
local prosecutors’ offices (therefore not legally considered organised crime cases anymore) or 
dismissed for lack of evidence and/or due to the poor quality of the referrals. Statistics on 
serious crimes that are not linked to criminal organisations and structured criminal groups 
indicate a large percentage of crimes related to the production and cultivation of narcotics. 
Narcotics-related cases accounted for 66.5% of such crimes in 2016, 72.3% in 2017, and 
68.9% in 2018. Narcotics-related cases were followed by money laundering; trafficking in 
vehicles; money counterfeiting and forgery; and trafficking in human beings. In these cases, 
there is also a serious gap between the numbers of new referrals and final convictions.  
Following the conclusion of the 2013 agreement on operational and strategic cooperation with 
Europol (and the updated framework amended in September 2018), Albania has taken further 
steps to strengthen international police cooperation with EU law enforcement agencies and 
Member States. The reinforced international law enforcement cooperation led to several large 
operations, which resulted in the dismantling of some prominent organised criminal groups, 
as also highlighted above. In November 2018, a liaison agreement on the secondment of a 
Europol liaison officer in Albania was ratified and it has now entered into force. The ASP 
continued to assess the main organised crime threats in line with Europol methodology. A 
growing number of messages are exchanged through the Europol Secure Information 
Exchange Network Application (SIENA): in 2018, a total of 8,960 messages were exchanged 
between Albania and Europol in this way, 28% more than in 2017. However, Albania should 
become more proactive in international police cooperation and make more use of Europol’s 
strategic intelligence products. Albania’s law enforcement authorities should make use of 
regional initiatives, such as the Joint Operational Office in Vienna, and the Task Force 
Western Balkans, which serve as a regional operational platform for international 
investigations into migrant-smuggling organised crime groups. In 2018, Albania took part in 
the annual planning of the operational activities under the European multidisciplinary 
platform against criminal threats (EMPACT). Albania should also enhance its participation in 
the different priorities of the EU Policy Cycle on serious and organised crime. There have 
been positive developments in the cooperation with Interpol. The Albanian Security Academy 
also cooperated with CEPOL and other international agencies and academies. 
On domestic operational capacity, legal and institutional reforms have strengthened law 
enforcement and security institutions. These reforms have been particularly helpful in 
enabling the establishment of the special task force under the ‘Power of law’ action plan. 
However, law enforcement authorities’ response to organised crime is often delayed, limited, 
and still conducted in a reactive rather than proactive way. This is due to a combination of 
factors: inadequate resources; undue influence and pressure on law enforcement; frequent and 
unjustified turnover of State Police personnel; low salaries; and limited equipment made 
available to the judicial police. Albania is encouraged to further establish joint investigation 
teams, and to step up the use of special investigation techniques and proactive investigations.  


===== PAGE 36 =====
 
35 
 
Police and prosecutors have been granted access to additional national registries (40 in total). 
However, they still lack direct access to some key national registries, including the electronic 
register of mobile phone subscribers. Steps have been taken to improve cooperation and 
mutual trust between police, prosecutors and other relevant agencies and bodies to detect and 
investigate complex criminal cases. This has led to operational results. Investigations of large 
criminal networks should be started proactively and in a more systematic way. 
Parallel financial investigations are not systematically conducted in criminal proceedings, 
and their effectiveness is limited. Albania should ensure appropriate measures to initiate 
financial investigations in a systematic manner in all proceedings involving assets derived 
from organised and serious crime, including drug trafficking and terrorism. Law enforcement 
structures and prosecution offices should be given further training in financial investigation 
techniques to improve their capacity to investigate unjustified wealth. 
Some progress was made on seizures of criminal assets. It is crucial that seizures are followed 
by final decisions on confiscation. The number and value of asset confiscations in criminal 
proceedings are limited. In fact, the non-conviction-based confiscation regime under the anti-
mafia law is more widely used than the criminal confiscation regime pursuant to Article 36 of 
the Criminal Code, which is mandatory and applies to all criminal offences. In domestic 
proceedings, there is no strategic or systemic approach to identify and confiscate criminal 
assets located abroad. Albania has developed tools for freezing, managing and confiscating 
criminal assets through amendments to the anti-mafia law. These tools include the possibility 
of non-conviction-based confiscation and third-party confiscation. However, Albania should 
focus on adopting and implementing rules on extended confiscation and precautionary 
freezing of assets. Albania should also urgently improve its capacity to manage frozen or 
confiscated assets so that they do not lose economic value. A national asset recovery strategy 
is currently being drafted. 
Albania is a source, transit and destination country for trafficking in human beings. 
Albanian women and children are subject to trafficking for sexual and labour exploitation 
within the country and in some EU Member States. The Prosecutor’s Office registered 30 new 
criminal proceedings for trafficking in 2017 and 21 in 2018. Most of the referrals involved 
adults. The number of final convictions remained very low (9 in 2017 and 3 in 2018). In 2018, 
there have been 94 victims of trafficking (VOTs) and potential victims of trafficking (PVOTs) 
who were identified and assisted. Cooperation between the police and prosecutors during 
investigations improved and administrative procedures were simplified. NGO-run shelters are 
underfunded and the government does not consistently conduct victim-centred investigations 
and prosecutions. Albania is encouraged to conduct financial investigations related to 
trafficking in human beings cases; ensure early identification of VOTs; improve cross-border 
and international cooperation; contribute to successful reintegration of victims; and provide 
child victims of trafficking with adequate protection. The improved legislative framework for 
VOTs, including amendments to the Criminal Procedural Code, has yet to be implemented. 
The national referral mechanism for VOTs/PVOTs was fully functional. In August 2018, the 
government adopted new standard operating procedures for the protection of VOTs/PVOTs. 
These procedures provide for the identification, referral, protection and assistance of 
VOTs/PVOTs, including children. Albania should strengthen its criminal justice system and 


===== PAGE 37 =====
 
36 
 
step up efforts to prevent trafficking in human beings. It should pay particular attention to 
unaccompanied children and child victims of trafficking. 
On trafficking in weapons, large numbers of military-grade firearms are available in 
Albania. These firearms are used by Albanian criminal groups and are trafficked primarily to 
neighbouring countries. Albania is also a destination and transit country for light firearms. 
There were 5 new criminal cases in 2017 and 11 in 2018. The number of final convictions 
were 59 in 2017 and 34 in 2018. Albania participates in Europol operational activities within 
the EMPACT on firearms. Albania should finalise the establishment of the firearms focal 
point in the ASP. 
Cybercrime and internet fraud in particular remain a concern. The number of registered 
criminal proceedings related to computer fraud increased. Final convictions for cybercrime 
have thus far remained low: one in 2018 and five in 2017. Albania should adopt a cybercrime 
strategy and establish a more effective law enforcement response focusing on the detection, 
traceability and prosecution of cyber criminals. 
Albania has a large informal sector and its economy is primarily cash-based. Crimes that 
generate large amounts of money in Albania include drug trafficking, tax evasion, smuggling 
and human trafficking. The main money laundering methods are illegal gambling 
establishments, exploitation of exchange houses, and cross-border transportation of currency. 
The Moneyval report published in December highlighted a number of deficiencies in the 
Albanian system for tackling money-laundering and terrorist financing. Albania has been 
placed under enhanced follow-up, and should implement without delay the recommendations 
of the Moneyval report to avoid a possible ‘grey-listing’ by the Financial Action Task Force 
in February 2020. The government adopted an action plan in September to address these 
recommendations; its implementation has been so far in line with the planned deadlines. 
In 2017, 309 cases on money laundering were referred to prosecutors, against 257 in 2018. 
The number of convictions for money laundering at appeal level remains low (2 in 2017 and 
10 in 2018). Limited law-enforcement resources, weak legal institutions, corruption, and a 
largely cash-based economy with substantial informal sectors all make Albania vulnerable to 
money laundering. The witness protection programme within the ASP has worked 
satisfactorily. In 2018, it implemented 17 witness protection programmes. Proactively fighting 
organised crime and corruption remains fundamental to countering criminal infiltration of the 
political, legal and economic systems. 
Cooperation in the fight against drugs 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
The Ministry of Interior and Ministry of Health and Social Protection/Institute of Public 
Health are the main bodies in Albania in charge of fighting drug trafficking and preventing 
drug abuse respectively. Albania still has no national drug observatory and no functional 
Early Warning System on new psychoactive substances. In May 2018, Albania adopted the 
national plan against cannabis cultivation and trafficking 2018-20. The national drug strategy 
and action plan 2012-2016 expired, and a new strategy and action plan remain to be adopted. 
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
On the track record, in 2018 the police submitted to prosecutors 1 907 cases of drug 
production and trafficking involving 2 357 possible offenders. This was 164 cases and 128 
people fewer than in 2017 (when there were 2 071 cases and 2 485 possible offenders). In 
2018, the Prosecutor’s Office registered 1 524 drug production and trafficking cases (against 


===== PAGE 38 =====
 
37 
 
1 766 in 2017). Most of these cases were dismissed or suspended, and 532 cases resulted in 
indictments. Some 685 offenders received final convictions in 2018 (570 in 2017).  
Albania has been a source country for herbal cannabis trafficked into the EU. It is also 
increasingly a transit country for cocaine and heroin. However, the coordinated approach 
between Albanian institutions, cooperation with Member States (especially with Italy in 
carrying out airborne monitoring of the Albanian territory), and checks by the Albanian police 
have brought positive results. In 2018, there was a significant decline in the number of 
cannabis crops detected by the airborne surveillance campaign carried out by the Italian 
Guardia di Finanza and co-financed by the EU (675 plants detected by the airborne campaign 
were destroyed in 2018 compared with 4 844 in 2017 and 753 468 in 2016). In addition to 
airborne surveillance, the police carried out helicopter and drone monitoring of suspicious 
areas, and was active in inspecting greenhouses and warehouses. Compared with 2017, in 
2018 there were 24% fewer cannabis-cultivation plots detected and almost 46% fewer plants 
destroyed (67 000 plants destroyed in 2017 against 36 000 in 2018). Most of the cannabis 
plants were identified by the ASP during land operations. While the quantity of cannabis 
seized in 2018 was almost 75% lower than in 2017, there was a substantial increase in 
seizures of cocaine (from 3.7 kg in 2017 to 630.5 kg in 2018), heroin (from 21.5 kg in 2017 to 
24 kg in 2018), and hashish oil (from 7.1 litres in 2017 to 51.7 in 2018). The main points of 
entry for Albanian cannabis into the EU are the Adriatic Sea coast and the EU’s external 
border with the Western Balkans. The lack of secure storage for drugs and drug precursors 
prior to destruction remains an issue of concern. The practice of keeping only a small sample 
as material evidence for court proceedings instead of the entire seized quantity is not yet in 
place. An appropriate process for the destruction of precursors has yet to be set up. A new 
laboratory for collecting and analysing data allows for faster processing and response on the 
destruction of the plants.  
Albania is a transit and storage country for heroin and cocaine. Seizures of hard drugs 
increased considerably in 2018. Since the large seizure of 613.4 kg of cocaine from Colombia 
in February 2018, there have been several significant operations conducted by Albania all 
over the country. In October, a nationwide coordinated operation led to 44 arrests and the 
dismantling of a heroin lab in Has, with 182.5 kg of morphine seized.  
Cooperation continued with the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction 
(EMCDDA). In March 2019, Albania signed a working arrangement with the EMCDDA. 
This agreement will facilitate information exchange between the EU and Albania and capacity 
building activities. It will also contribute to the development of data collection and reporting 
on drugs. 
The list of precursors for which the production, trafficking and possession is illegal in Albania 
has not been updated since 1995 when Albania ratified the United Nations Convention on 
Psychotropic Substances. This leaves many such activities without criminal penalty.  
Fight against terrorism 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
The Counter-Terrorism Directorate of the ASP is the lead body on counter-terrorism. Other 
agencies active in this field are the State Intelligence Service and the Defence Intelligence and 
Security Agency. In addition, the State Police’s community policing personnel are involved in 
preventing radicalisation and combating violent extremism. In June 2018, the office of the 
National Coordinator for countering violent extremism (CVE), who is charged with 
overseeing the implementation of the national strategy for CVE, was upgraded to a National 
Coordination Centre for CVE, under the lead of the National Coordinator. 


===== PAGE 39 =====
 
38 
 
Albania has a comprehensive legal framework for preventing and combating the financing of 
terrorism. The country is a party to all Council of Europe conventions on counter-terrorism, 
including those covering the seizure and confiscation of the proceeds from crime and 
financing of terrorism. Albania has national counter-terrorism strategies on CVE and the 
prevention of violent extremism. In October, the country signed the joint EU-Western 
Balkans action plan on counter-terrorism, which sets out concrete steps for enhanced 
cooperation in countering terrorism and preventing radicalisation over the next two years. 
Albanian authorities have been cooperating with the EU in identifying priority actions for 
Albania to implement the related bilateral action plan. Albania should proactively implement 
the Albanian counter terrorism strategy, the Albanian CVE strategy and its action plans. 
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
On the track record, in 2017 there were 7 new proceedings, while in 2018 there were 4 new 
proceedings. In both years, there were no convictions. A number of deficiencies remain in the 
Albanian system for tackling terrorist financing. No Albanians are reported to have left the 
country to become foreign fighters since 2015. Some 45 individuals have returned from 
fighting in Syria, while 26 are believed to have died, and 73 remain in Syria. The 
Counter-Terrorism Directorate has continued to improve its capacity through specialised 
training, personnel and equipment. However, its operational and logistical capacity remains 
limited, in particular for special investigations and operations such as surveillance and 
interceptions. The upgraded CVE Centre is working with different line ministries and local 
authorities in the implementation of the CVE strategy. The Centre should be provided with 
sufficient funding, staff and political support to perform its tasks effectively.  
On international cooperation, regional cooperation and exchange of sensitive information 
with international partners was satisfactory. A protocol on cooperation in the fight against 
terrorism was signed with North Macedonia in February 2018. Albania cooperated swiftly 
with Interpol on urgent verifications of suspected terrorists following attacks in EU Member 
States. Cooperation with Europol was satisfactory. However, Albania should make more 
proactive use of Europol’s European Counter-Terrorism Centre, which has useful 
communication platforms, products, services and capabilities. Links between organised crime 
and terrorism should continue to be investigated. 
The government needs to develop programmes to reintegrate returning foreign terrorist 
fighters and their families. Efforts are also needed to improve the programmes to prevent 
radicalisation in prisons, and strengthen the monitoring mechanisms involving civil society 
and religious communities. Online radicalisation content in Albanian is on the rise. The 
authorities need to enhance their online monitoring and response capacities, and enhance their 
efforts to empower civil society to develop positive and alternative narratives online. The 
government also needs to step up efforts to counter external influences, including financial 
flows that could lead to further radicalisation. Albania is actively participating in the 
implementation of the Western Balkan counter-terrorism initiative (WBCTi). 
Legal and irregular migration  
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
The Ministry of Interior is the main actor in the field of migration. The main bodies under its 
supervision in implementing migration policies are the Department of Border and Migration 
of the General Directorate of the ASP, and the Directorate of Anti-Trafficking and Migration. 
On legal and labour migration, other actors are the Ministry of Finance and Economy and 
employment offices active at local level. The legal framework on migration needs to be 
further aligned with recent developments in the acquis. Negotiations on readmission 


===== PAGE 40 =====
 
39 
 
agreements (agreements to return irregularly staying migrants with no right to stay to their 
country of origin) are ongoing with Russia, and were signed in 2018 with Morocco, 
Afghanistan, Iraq and Iran. There are readmission implementing protocols with 12 Member 
States. The implementation protocol with Spain was signed in May 2018. 
In June 2019, Albania plans to adopt the national strategy on migration governance and its 
action plan covering 2019-22, providing a clear framework to better manage and coordinate 
migration flows. The national strategy for the diaspora 2018-24 and its action plan were 
adopted in May 2018. As part of the broader policy area of migration and development, 
efforts to engage the diaspora should continue. The status agreement with the EU on the 
deployment of the first European Border and Coast Guard’s teams entered into force on 1 
May. It will allow the European Border and Coast Guard Agency (EBCGA) to assist the 
Albanian authorities in external border management. The Status Agreement was swiftly 
operationalised through the deployment of first EBCG teams on 22 May. This will also 
strengthen border controls and the fight against migrant smuggling. 
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
The number of irregular migrants arriving in Albania and trying to reach EU Member States 
increased significantly in 2018 (5 730 in 2018 against 1 047 in 2017). By far the largest group 
were Syrian nationals, followed by Pakistani and Iraqi nationals. The migratory flows were 
largely of a transitory nature, with most migrants arriving from Greece and leaving Albania 
after a couple of days.  
Albania’s reception capacity to accommodate migrants was sufficient. Its reception centre for 
irregular migrants in Karreç, with a total capacity of 150 beds, requires refurbishment. The 
country still does not have facilities for unaccompanied minors. Alternatives to detention 
should be put in place for children, women at risk, and people with serious medical 
conditions, as provided for in the Law on foreigners. Border police staff should be trained in 
identifying vulnerable categories of people and referring them for assistance. Albania is 
updating its contingency plan for a possible mass influx of migrants and asylum seekers. The 
plan, initially drafted in 2015, was never formally approved by the government.  
The overall staffing of the State Police’s Department for Border and Migration is limited 
(1 635 employees) and needs to be increased. Albania should continue to ensure appropriate 
training of its border police staff in compliance with basic training standards for EU border 
guards. The number of irregular migrants with no right to stay that returned from Albania to 
their country of origin remained low. In 2018, 1 044 irregular migrants received an order to 
return to their country of origin, compared with 683 in 2017. Most of them were returned 
(mainly to Greece) with a voluntary departure order. There were also reports of informal 
returns (pushbacks) to Greece. Albania is encouraged to apply the return procedures in a way 
that is compliant with the Law on foreigners and to ensure that its return mechanism for 
irregular migrants is in line with the EU acquis.   
The readmission agreement with the EU, in force since 1 May 2006, is being implemented 
in a satisfactory manner, with Albania swiftly honouring readmission requests from Member 
States both for own and third country nationals. Albanian nationals ordered to leave are 
effectively returned. The cooperation between Albania and the EBCGA in the area of return 
operations is very good. In total, from 2016 to 2018, 254 return operations were organised to 
Albania and a total of 10 043 Albanian nationals were returned. In 2018, the EBCGA 
coordinated 81 return operations to Albania, returning 2 953 Albanian nationals. Additional 
efforts are required to provide reintegration support to returned Albanian citizens. Training of 
staff working at the migration counter and regional employment offices should be 
strengthened.  


===== PAGE 41 =====
 
40 
 
Asylum 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
On paper, the country has the necessary institutions in place to handle asylum claims. 
Appeals can be lodged in principle with the National Commission for Refugees and Asylum. 
However, the Commission was not functional in 2018. This issue should be addressed swiftly 
and the Commission reactivated. Judicial appeals can be lodged at the administrative courts. 
Procedural safeguards to guarantee fair procedures for the most vulnerable individuals should 
be improved through cooperation by the Ministry of Interior with other relevant ministries. 
The instruction regulating pre-screening and detention should be revised and aligned with 
international standards. The revised version should include: procedural safeguards for 
vulnerable persons, and provisions on the identification, referral and protection of children 
and persons with special needs. It should align its content with the new Law on child 
protection, and refer specifically to compliance with the non-refoulement principle and 
language rights. Albania is party to the 1951 Geneva Convention. The current Law on asylum 
is partially aligned to the EU acquis.  
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
The number of asylum seekers in 2018 increased more than tenfold compared with 2017. In 
2018, 4,386 individuals applied for asylum in Albania, against 309 in 2017. As most asylum 
seekers leave the country after a few days, the vast majority of asylum requests are not further 
processed. In 2018, there were 105 decisions, with three refugee-status recognitions, and 13 
subsidiary protections awarded. 
On the asylum procedure, asylum requests are recorded by the Border and Migration Police 
during pre-screening and are then referred to the Directorate for Asylum and Citizenship. 
Although the sharp increase in arrivals in 2018 was met with a generally adequate response by 
the authorities, the capacity and staffing of the Directorate for Asylum and Citizenship need to 
be enhanced. Some asylum seekers faced considerable delays in the treatment of their cases. 
To adhere to legal timeframes, a more proactive approach by the Directorate for Asylum and 
Citizenship is needed to process applications by asylum seekers that have remained in the 
country. More training is needed on how to assess individual claims, particularly the 
assessment of information on country of origin and cases involving vulnerable people. Access 
to information about asylum procedures and interpretation has improved but should be 
guaranteed without exception. Electronic, biometric and fingerprint data management needs 
to be strengthened, and border crossing points interconnected. 
There is consensus among stakeholders that the pre-screening instructions should be amended 
to include additional safeguards, and involve the participation of other relevant ministries, 
notably for vulnerable persons and persons with specific needs. More direct input from the 
Directorate for Asylum and Citizenship, with regular attendance at interviews and support to 
the police, would improve the whole asylum procedure.  
Albania has tripled its reception capacity for asylum seekers since October 2017. The total 
number of places, including at the National Centre for Asylum Seekers in Tirana and 
temporary accommodation facilities in Gjirokastra and Shkodra, now stands at 400 
bed-places. As most asylum applications were withdrawn after a few days, the increased 
capacity has so far been sufficient. Provisions were made to set up emergency camps for 500 
people in Gjirokastra and 100 people in Korça in the event of a massive influx. The reception 
conditions were generally adequate. A reception centre for vulnerable groups has been made 
available in Gjirokastra. In light of the increased number of unaccompanied and separated 


===== PAGE 42 =====
 
41 
 
children, a mechanism needs to be put in place for their effective and timely identification and 
referral. 
The status of some 2 700 Iranians (from the People’s Mujahedeen of Iran), relocated to 
Albania in 2015 and 2016, has yet to be decided. They currently hold temporary residence 
permits on humanitarian grounds. Albania cooperates on an informal basis with the European 
Asylum Support Office (EASO). 
Visa policy 
Albania’s visa policy is not yet aligned with the EU’s, including with the EU lists of countries 
whose nationals require a visa and those who are exempt from this requirement. Albania has a 
visa free regime with Kazakhstan, Kuwait, and Turkey, which are not on the EU’s visa-free 
list. Between April and October, Albania lifts its visa requirement for citizens from Bahrain, 
Belarus, China, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia and Thailand, a practice which is not in 
line with the EU acquis. In order to ensure a well-managed migration and security 
environment as the underlying condition for the continuous fulfilment of the benchmarks, the 
country needs to ensure alignment with the EU visa policy. Albania has in place an e-visa 
system, used to register all foreign nationals applying for a visa when entering Albania. The 
system is provided by TIMS software (total information management system). 
Overall, the visa liberalisation benchmarks continue to be fulfilled. Good progress was 
achieved in the implementation of actions to tackle irregular migration. Albania continued to 
strengthen its operational cooperation with the Member States most affected by irregular 
migration from Albania, including through information exchange on Schengen entry bans and 
information campaigns on the rights and obligations of visa-free travel. Cooperation with 
France, in particular, has intensified. Following the signature in December 2017 of an 
agreement with France on strengthening operational police cooperation, four Albanian police 
liaison officers were posted to France to support French law enforcement authorities in 
investigating criminal cases where Albanian nationals are involved. Repatriation operations of 
unfounded Albanian asylum seekers are organised in full cooperation and coordination 
between the two countries (a recent operation in April involved the repatriation of 50 people 
from France). 
The number of manifestly unfounded asylum applications in Member States and 
Schengen-associated countries decreased but remained high. The number of asylum 
applications fell by almost 15% (from 26 020 in 2017 to 22 170 in 2018). In France, which 
remained the main receiving country for Albanian asylum applicants, the number of 
applications fell by 20% (from 12 130 in 2017 to 9 680 in 2018). In Germany, the number of 
applications decreased by 52%. Another important destination country is Greece, with 3 325 
applications. In 2018, the recognition rate (i.e. the number of successful asylum applications 
expressed as a percentage of all decisions) in the EU Member States and Schengen associated 
countries was around 7.6% (made up of a subsidiary protection rate of 4.7%, a refugee status 
rate of 1.7%, and a national protection status of 1.2%). 
Albanian nationals remained the largest group of asylum seekers from visa-free Western 
Balkan countries. Albanian nationals also had the highest number of illegal stayers and cases 
of illegal entry. Albania has implemented measures to prevent abusive asylum applications. 
These include tighter checks at border crossing points, more thorough exit interviews and 
information campaigns. In 2018, 20 255 Albanian citizens were refused permission to exit the 
Albanian territory at border crossings compared with 12 175 in 2017 (an increase of 59%). 
Border surveillance was intensified for the prevention of illegal crossing of borders. In 2018, 
2 158 Albanian citizens were detected attempting to illegally exit the Albanian territory, 24% 
more than in 2017. Albania needs to continue and strengthen its efforts to tackle the 


===== PAGE 43 =====
 
42 
 
phenomenon of unfounded asylum applications and address the ‘push factors’ behind it. 
Immediate and determined action should be taken under the post-visa liberalisation 
monitoring mechanism.  
There has been a large increase in the number of seized forged EU passports, used mostly by 
Albanian nationals to reach destinations in the EU. In December, 39 persons were 
apprehended with fake passports. In February, a major police operation resulted in the arrest 
of 32 persons suspected of being part of a criminal organisation involved in the falsification of 
travel documents for citizens travelling to EU countries, the US and Canada.  
Unaccompanied minors from Albania travelling to EU Member States remain a matter of 
great concern. The ASP continued to carry out tight checks on children travelling abroad with 
one or both parents. The Albanian authorities should continue to work closely with the most 
affected Member States. Increased attention should be given to the successful reintegration of 
returnees, especially the most vulnerable, such as Roma and Egyptians. A new strategy 
document on reintegration of returnees and clear definition of responsibilities for its 
implementation is needed following the expiration in 2015 of the previous strategy for 
reintegration. Better communication and coordination is required between ministries, local 
government, international organisations and NGOs active in the reintegration of returnees. 
Schengen and external borders 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
The Law on border control and associated implementing by-laws are aligned with the acquis. 
However, the legislative framework for the management of Albania’s external borders is not 
yet fully aligned with EU standards. The 2014-2020 integrated-border-management strategy 
and action plan is broadly aligned with European standards.  
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
Implementation of the integrated-border-management strategy and action plan continued 
smoothly. The focus of this implementation was on the regulatory and institutional 
framework; human resources and training; communication and exchange of information; and 
infrastructure and equipment for border control and surveillance. The reconstruction of the 
Hani i Hoti and Morinë border crossing points with Montenegro and Kosovo was completed 
in the summer of 2018. In April 2018, Albania signed a protocol with Montenegro for the 
implementation of joint border checks at the shared Zatriebaçka Cijevna-Grabon crossing 
point. In December, the agreement with Montenegro on the opening of the joint 
Zogaj-Skje/Ckla crossing point entered into force. The trilateral centre in Plav has been 
operational since July. In December, Albania concluded an agreement with Kosovo on the 
shared border crossing point at Morinë. This agreement regulates the border checks at the 
shared border crossing point and entails joint control activities in line with the concept of 
integrated border management.  
The integrated sea surveillance system of radars for the ‘blue’ (sea) border is operational. 
Overall, more resources need to be devoted to modernising border infrastructure and 
increasing surveillance of the ‘green’ (land) and ‘blue’ borders. The TIMS database system is 
interconnected with Interpol’s system. The automatic generation of alerts through the Interpol 
system enables border police to identify internationally wanted persons, stolen vehicles, or 
lost/stolen travel documents. Albania should continue risk-analysis training at all levels and 
                                                 
  This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244/1999 and the ICJ 
Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence. 


===== PAGE 44 =====
 
43 
 
ensure sufficient training for border police. In particular, it should include protection-sensitive 
migration management in the curriculum of the Police Academy. 
Inter-agency cooperation improved. Joint and integrated ‘blue’ border patrols were 
conducted regularly between the Albanian Navy, the Coast Guard and the Border and 
Migration Police. Cooperation between border guards and customs worked well, including on 
mutual access to databases. The border police’s investigative powers need to be strengthened, 
in particular to detect cases of people-smuggling and trafficking. In October 2018, Albania 
signed the status agreement with the EU, which will allow the deployment of EBCG teams 
with executive powers for joint operations with Albanian authorities on Albanian territory. 
The status agreement will also ensure better management of irregular migration. Albania 
actively participated in the Western Balkan risk analysis network. Operational cooperation 
with neighbouring countries continued to be good, although efforts to improve bilateral 
cooperation must continue.  
Albania is planning to introduce the United States-sponsored personal identification secure 
comparison and evaluation system (PISCES) at its border crossing points. Albania should 
ensure that PISCES is set up and operated in a manner consistent with the EU acquis. The 
installation of cameras at the border crossing points has helped to reduce corruption at the 
borders. The adoption and application of standard operating procedures set out detailed 
procedures and strict deadlines for service delivery and resulted in lower corruption. In 2018, 
the Department for Border and Migration decided on disciplinary measures against 139 police 
and migration officers, of which 34 were removed from the police and 105 were sanctioned 
with disciplinary measures. In 2017, there were far fewer disciplinary measures (65). Some 27 
police and migration officers were removed from their jobs in 2017. 
Judicial cooperation in civil and criminal matters 
Albania continued to intensify judicial cooperation in criminal matters, including with EU 
Member States. Albania signed a cooperation agreement with Eurojust in October 2018, 
which will allow for the exchange of personal data on operational cases. However, additional 
steps are still necessary for the agreement to enter into force. In 2018, Albania was involved 
in 8 Eurojust cases (against 4 in 2017), mainly dealing with drug trafficking and crimes 
against life, limb or personal freedom. Albania participated in one joint investigation team 
supported by Eurojust. A concrete result of the cooperation with Eurojust was the arrest of 43 
people involved in a large drug trafficking case, thanks to a joint investigation team created 
by Italy and Albania with the support of Eurojust.  
On judicial cooperation in civil matters, in 2017 Albania received 200 requests and sent out 
104 requests of mutual legal assistance, against 383 and 218 respectively in 2018. On judicial 
cooperation in criminal matters, in 2017 the country received 1 311 requests and sent out 
1 177 requests for mutual legal assistance, compared with 1 096 and 1 330 respectively in 
2018. The country issued 89 extradition requests and received 181 in 2017, against 160 and 
115 respectively in 2018. There were eight incoming and eight outgoing requests for transfers 
of criminal proceedings in 2018 (compared with three for both kinds of requests in 2017). 
Albania needs to further improve international cooperation, the timely implementation of 
multilateral instruments, and its institutional capacity. Further efforts are necessary to align 
legislation with the acquis and promote the exchange of best practices in judicial cooperation.  
All aspects of customs cooperation are now covered under Chapter 29 – Customs Union. 
 


===== PAGE 45 =====
 
44 
 
3. 
FUNDAMENTALS FIRST: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND COMPETITIVENESS 
 
In line with the conclusions of the European Council in Copenhagen in June 1993, EU 
accession requires the existence of a functioning market economy and the capacity to cope 
with competitive pressure and market forces within the EU. 
Economic governance has become even more important in the enlargement process in recent 
years. The Commission’s monitoring involves two processes: the economic reform-
programme process, and the assessment in the pages below of compliance with the economic 
criteria for accession. Each enlargement country prepares an economic reform programme 
(ERP) every year, which sets out a medium-term macro-fiscal policy framework and a 
structural-reform agenda aimed at ensuring competitiveness and inclusive growth. The ERPs 
are the basis for country-specific policy guidance jointly adopted by the EU, the Western 
Balkans and Turkey at ministerial level in May each year. 
3.1. 
The existence of a functioning market economy 
Albania has made some progress and is moderately prepared in developing a functioning 
market economy. Economic growth increased further and unemployment decreased even 
though it remains high. Exports grew solidly and the current-account deficit narrowed. The 
high public-debt-to-GDP ratio continued to fall. The stability of the financial sector 
improved, as banks continued to reduce non-performing loans. However, lending to the 
private corporate sector remained muted and the high use of foreign currency in the domestic 
market persisted. Steps have been taken to develop the non-banking financial market. The 
comprehensive judicial reform advanced well, but shortcomings in the rule of law continued 
to hamper businesses and deter investment. The business environment has only improved in 
some areas, and while formal employment grew, informality is estimated to have remained 
high. The liberalisation of the energy sector progressed, albeit with some delays.    
In order to improve the functioning of the market economy, Albania should in particular: 
 advance fiscal consolidation and developing a plan to mobilise revenue and to address 
Albania: Key economic figures
2010-15 
average
2016
2017
2018
GDP per capita (% of EU-28 in PPS)
30.4
31.2 
31.7
32.2
Real GDP growth 
2.2
3.4
3.8
4.1
Economic activity rate of the population aged 15-64 (%), total
62.9*
66.2
66.8
68.3
      female
53.2*
58.3
57.7
59.7
      male
72.8*
74.1
75.8
76.9
Unemployment rate (%), total
16.4**
15.6
14.1
12.8
      female
14.7**
14.6
12.8
12.3
      male
17.7**
16.4
15.1
13.2
Employment (annual growth %)
1.5
6
2.7
2.1
Nominal wages1 (annual growth %)
5.2
-0.8
3.0
:
Consumer price index (annual growth %)
2.2
1.3
2.0
2.1
Exchange rate against EUR
139.5
135.2
133.0
123.4
Current account balance (% of GDP)
-11.6
-7.6
-7.5
-6.6
Net foreign direct investment, FDI (% of GDP)
8.6
8.8
7.8
7.9
General government balance (% of GDP)
-4.0
-1.8
-2.0
-1.5
General government debt (% of GDP)
64.7
72.3
70.0
67.3
Source: Eurostat and national sources
Notes: * 2014-2015
           ** 2013-2015
           1 average gross monthly wages


===== PAGE 46 =====
 
45 
 
informality; 
 ensure monitoring and control of fiscal liabilities stemming from Public-Private 
Partnerships and of arrears; 
 improve access to finance by strengthening collateral enforcement and raising financial 
inclusion; 
 improve the labour market relevance, quality and targeting of active labour market 
policies, including upskilling of adults. 
Economic governance  
Albania remained committed to strengthening macroeconomic stability and fiscal 
consolidation. The government continued to reduce the still-high level of public debt at a 
faster pace than originally planned due to the appreciation of the currency and underspending 
on the budget. Reforms to the management of public finance have progressed with EU 
support. However, administrative restructuring following national elections has negatively 
affected overall capacity in the public administration. It remains a challenge to create a 
stronger link between the budget process and policy-making, and this challenge affects 
expenditure planning. The budget for 2018 was published and adopted in time, and 
consultations with civil society groups for the preparation of the 2019 budget had also started 
in time. The policy guidance jointly agreed at the May 20183 Economic and Financial 
Dialogue between the EU and the Western Balkans and Turkey has been partially 
implemented.  
Macroeconomic stability 
The Albanian economy has continued to expand, thanks to both domestic and foreign 
demand. Annual real GDP growth, averaging 2.2 % between 2010 and 2015, accelerated to 
3.8% in 2017, and averaged 4.2% in the first three quarters of 2018. In 2018, all components 
of domestic demand contributed positively to output expansion. Private consumption was the 
main driver, supported by rising employment and low rates of interest and inflation. The 
contribution made by net exports to 
GDP growth remained negative in 
2018, as high imports offset the 
recovery in goods exports. Despite 
strong economic growth and rising 
employment, per capita GDP (at 
purchasing power parity) stood at only 
29% of the EU-28 average in 2017, 
representing a very slow pace of 
convergence. 
The high current-account deficit 
continued to narrow, and was financed by foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows. 
Albania has historically run a large trade deficit in goods, which has recently widened due to 
exceptional FDI-related imports. The goods trade deficit was partly offset by a surplus in the 
balance of services, which benefited from: (i) strongly increasing revenues from foreign 
tourism between 2016 and 2018; and (ii) an even stronger increase in the contribution of 
manufacturing services. The real-effective-exchange-rate index (REER) climbed 9% by the 
end of 2018, reflecting the recent acceleration in the appreciation of the Albanian currency. 
                                                 
3 
Western 
Balkans 
and 
Turkey: 
Joint 
conclusions 
of 
the 
economic 
and 
financial 
dialogue, 
2018, 
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-
releases/2018/05/25/western-balkans-and-turkey-joint-conclusions-of-the-economic-and-financial-dialogue/  
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018*
Albania: Real GDP growth and contributions 
Priv. cons.
Gov. cons.
GFCF
Stocks
Net exports
real GDP growth
Source: Macrobond, own calculations
% y-o-y
* forecast


===== PAGE 47 =====
 
46 
 
Overall, the current-account deficit fell considerably, dropping to 6.3% of GDP in 2018 from 
its 2010-2015 average of 11.6%. This decline in the current-account deficit was helped by 
larger remittances and rising exports of both goods and services. Both remittances and FDI 
recorded a slightly decreasing share in GDP: remittances fell to from 5.8% in 2015 to 5.2% of 
GDP in 2018, while FDI softened from 8.6% to 7.9%, as the construction of two large energy 
projects is nearing completion. Foreign reserves continued to cover 6.5 months of imports and 
37% of total external debt in 2018, providing an adequate safeguard against adverse shocks.   
Persistently below-target inflation and the rapidly strengthening currency prompted 
further monetary easing and foreign-exchange interventions by the Albanian central 
bank. The freely floating exchange rate of the Albanian lek appreciated by about 7.2% 
against the euro by the end of 2018. In the middle of the year, the central bank began to 
intervene on the foreign-exchange market to contain this appreciation. Average annual 
inflation has been below the central bank’s 3% target since 2013. Food prices pushed the 
inflation rate upwards, but lower import prices due to the stronger lek meant that overall 
inflation only increased slightly, rising to 2.2% in 2018 from 2.0% in 2017. The Albanian 
central bank, the Bank of Albania, has therefore maintained a very accommodative monetary 
policy by lowering the key policy rate (the repo rate) to a record low of 1% in July. The 
monetary-policy stance effectively supported price stability in line with the policy framework. 
The government’s fiscal deficit is now 50% below its 2010-2015 average. The general 
government deficit fell to 2.1% of 
GDP in 2017 from 4.1% in 2015. 
Based on preliminary data, the 2018 
budget has turned out with a deficit of 
1.5% of GDP, lower than the initially 
targeted 2% of GDP. This lower-than-
expected deficit is mainly due to 
ambitious plans for capital expenditure 
that were not fully implemented. The 
successful clearance of arrears in 2014 
under the IMF programme accounted 
for most of the deficit reduction in 
2015/16. However, the last 3 years have seen lower expenditure and higher revenues, both of 
which helped to lower the deficit. At the same time, new arrears emerged due to: (i) 
weaknesses in budget planning and implementation; (ii) policy-coordination issues between 
government levels (local-government arrears); and (iii) slow tax-refund procedures (arrears of 
VAT refunds). A broader tax base, reduced informality and an increase in social contributions 
from increased formal employment helped to increase revenue. The recent multiplication of 
VAT exemptions will complicate attempts to broaden the tax base and improve the efficiency 
of tax collection. Overall, tax revenues remain far below potential. This is mainly due to 
informality but also due to tax evasion in the formal economy.  
At 67.3% of GDP, public debt remains high. This high debt level could be unsustainable 
in case of an adverse shock to the economy. Supported by the appreciation of the lek, the 
gross-public-debt-to-GDP ratio declined to 67.3% at the end of 20184. The government 
successfully placed a EUR 500 million seven-year eurobond in October 2018. This helped to 
reduce the still-high annual rollover needs, and reduce the pressure by government financing 
on the domestic local-currency debt market. 
                                                 
4 The Albanian government includes its loan guarantees fully in its public debt calculation, and uses the IMF 
GDP forecast to calculate the debt-to-GDP ratio. 
0
20
40
60
80
-10
-5
0
5
10
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018*
Albania: Fiscal developments
Primary balance (lhs)
Interest (lhs)
GG balance (lhs)
Public Debt (rhs)
Source: National sources
% of GDP
* forecast


===== PAGE 48 =====
 
47 
 
Public financing is not sufficient to bridge the large infrastructure gap, so the 
government is seeking to mobilise private capital - mainly through public-private 
partnerships (PPPs). Public investment grew on average 6.2% per year in 2013-2018, and 
accounted for about 18% of total public expenditure on average. The increasing reliance on 
PPPs generates contingent liabilities and therefore fiscal risks. The newly established Fiscal 
Risk Unit does not have sufficient capacity to monitor these risks. Infrastructure financing 
could be made more efficient by taking advantage of the potential for synergies in the 
planning and execution of both PPPs and conventional public investment. 
The overall macroeconomic policy mix has been broadly appropriate, and Albania has 
complied with fiscal rules. The main fiscal rule — to keep the public-debt-to-GDP ratio 
declining until the limit of 45% is reached — has been complied with. Budget implementation 
and public financial management (PFM) should be strengthened to avoid arrears and manage 
fiscal risks. Increasing tax revenues could help speed up the path to the 45%-debt-to-GDP 
limit, thus strengthening debt sustainability. Maintaining a loose monetary-policy stance has 
been appropriate for promoting a sustained rise in inflation towards the 3% target. 
Functioning of product markets 
Business environment 
Albania’s competitiveness and private-sector development remained below potential, as 
efforts to improve the business environment had poor results. Growth in the number of 
active domestic enterprises slowed from 5.5% in 2016 to 1% in 2017, with the number of 
newly established enterprises in 2017 about half that of 2015. Similarly, the number of 
foreign enterprises in industry and construction in 2017 actually declined compared to 2015, 
as did the number of greenfield investments. However, in the services sector and in 
agriculture, foreign enterprises grew strongly in 2017 compared to 2015. Major concerns 
raised by the business community include a lack of effective implementation of legislation, ad 
hoc regulatory changes, cumbersome tax payment procedures, and the controversial use of 
public-procurement procedures. Consultation with the private sector is ineffective. In 
addition, the development of a proper real-estate market has been held back by the lack of a 
cadastre and the problem of land titles that are burdened by ownership conflicts. This has 
been a particular hindrance to investment in agriculture and tourism. 
Although judicial and institutional reforms continued, ineffective regulation and 
informality continue to pose major challenges for businesses. Progress has been made on 
judicial reforms, but this has not yet resulted in a more favourable business environment. The 
new Bankruptcy Law still awaits the adoption of accompanying regulations, and the 
implementation of the amended Private Bailiffs Law is hampered by disputes over fee 
schedules and the selection of bailiffs. In addition, corruption remains a widespread problem. 
In spite of measures taken to address the informal economy, it is estimated to account for 
about one third of GDP. This is causing losses in tax revenue, a lack of labour protection and 
unfair competition among firms. 
State influence on product markets 
State involvement and public subsidies remained overall low in the Albanian economy, 
but the increased reliance on PPPs raises the potential of state influence in certain 
markets. The government has increasingly engaged in PPPs, in particular for energy and 
transport, where there are price or volume agreements for services and goods. Government 
payments under these contracts are by law limited to 5% of the previous year’s tax revenue, 
and for 2018 this limit has reportedly been complied with. Most of the existing PPP contracts 
were selected on the basis of unsolicited proposals, which reduce competition in procurement. 


===== PAGE 49 =====
 
48 
 
It is welcome that the ongoing review of the procurement guidelines for these projects 
proposes to restrict the use of unsolicited proposals. Although the procurement legislation has 
recently improved, the implementation of public procurement remained flawed and continued 
to be perceived as not being transparent. The reported state aid granted in Albania between 
2014 and 2017 was estimated at about 0.7% of GDP annually. In 2017, it was reported that 
0.14% of GDP was spent on state aid, amounting to EUR 16.88 million, an increase on the 
EUR 12.7 million spent on state aid in 2016. Most of this EUR 16.88 million was spent on 
grants (about 77%) and tax exemptions (about 23%). Reportedly, most state aid goes to public 
services. 
Privatisation and restructuring 
The private sector remained dominant in the economy, but although overall market 
liberalisation is well advanced in Albania, there are delays in the liberalisation of the 
energy market. About 19% of assets in the Albanian economy in 2017 were owned by the 
state. State involvement in the economy is concentrated in electricity, with state-owned 
enterprises providing around three quarters of the electricity used in the country. State-owned 
enterprises are also active in other public utilities, such as railways, water supply and natural 
resources. Albania has moved ahead with separating the production, purchasing and 
distribution of electricity. However, the functional unbundling of the distribution-system 
operator from generation operators has not been completed. Restructured public electricity 
companies face difficulties in freely accessing the market, and electricity prices for consumers 
are not fully deregulated. This provides little economic incentive for electricity companies to 
enter the market. The reforms of the public electricity companies have substantially decreased 
their technical losses, improved their bill-collection rates, and strengthened their financial 
situations. However, shortcomings remain in the corporate governance and finances of the 
state-owned electricity companies. Competitive mechanisms have only been fully introduced 
for projects in renewable energy. In 2018, Albania successfully completed the first-ever 
renewable-energy support auction in the Energy Community, an organisation that aims to 
connect the EU’s energy market with the energy market of some of the non-EU neighbours.  
Functioning of the financial market 
Financial stability 
The declining stock of non-performing loans (NPLs) improved the stability of the 
banking system, but sovereign exposure and poor collateral-execution remain risks to 
stability. The ratio of NPLs to total loans fell to 11% by the end of 2018, down from 15.6% 
in 2017. NPLs declined mainly through write-offs, but Albanian banks resolved more NPLs 
through collateral execution in 2018 than they did in 2017. The banking sector also holds over 
20% of its assets in government securities, exposing it to sovereign risks, while a quarter of 
domestic loans and deposits remain exposed to exchange-rate risks. Banking supervision and 
management have been increasingly aligned with international standards. The banking 
sector’s capital adequacy and liquidity ratios remain well above the minimum regulatory 
levels. Return on equity softened from 15.7% in 2017 to 12.9% in 2018. 
Access to finance 
Financial intermediation remained undeveloped, and credit growth to the business 
sector stayed subdued. Credit to the private sector amounted to about 39% of banking sector 
assets in 2018. Credit growth to business was sluggish due to: (i) banks’ greater risk 
awareness; (ii) tighter lending conditions; (iii) the low financial literacy of SMEs; and (iv) 
‘unbankable’ business plans. Only lending to households picked up recently. The small but 
growing non-bank financial sector, with about 30 institutions, owned 10.7% of total financial 


===== PAGE 50 =====
 
49 
 
sector assets in the first half of 2018. In February 2018, the first private stock exchange 
(ALSE - the Albanian Security Exchange) began trading government securities, but equity 
and corporate bond finance remain underdeveloped. Overall, financial inclusion remained 
low, with only 40% of adults and about 75% of SMEs holding bank accounts. The Bank of 
Albania has set out a plan to promote financial inclusion, which is important for reducing 
informality, illicit financial flows and remittance fees.   
The functioning of the labour market  
The economic upswing has translated into increasing employment and lower 
unemployment. Employment growth of 2.7% in 2017 allowed the unemployment rate to 
decline from 15.6% in 2016 to 14.1% in 2017 and to 12.8% in 2018. However, employment 
growth slowed further in 2017, falling to 2.1%. The high youth unemployment rate (covering 
the 15-29 age group) continued to fall, dropping from 33.2% in 2015 to 25.9% in 2017 and 
further to 23.1% in 2018. The working age population began decreasing in 2015, so the 
growth in labour supply has been driven by rising participation rates (which rose from 66.8% 
in 2017 to 68.3% in 2018). The gap between the labour force participation rates of men and 
women fell from 20.9 pps in 2014 to 17.2 pps in 2018. Public employment services improved 
job mediation, but active labour market policies remain limited in scope, insufficiently 
targeted and underfunded. Only a very limited number of the unemployed (2.2%) receive 
unemployment benefits or are in active employment promotion programmes. Thus, social 
benefits are not providing an incentive to withdraw from the labour market and the labour 
code provides sufficient flexibility not to dampen job creation. Overall, wages grew by about 
3% in 2018 but overall Albanian salaries are among the lowest in the region and reflect the 
low productivity. Low incomes, low social security and low-quality job offers continued 
driving Albanians - in particular the higher educated (“brain drain”) - into emigration, 
although the recent employment growth decelerated this trend. 
Three trends continue to transform the structure of the Albanian economy: the 
significant shift of employment to the non-agricultural private sector; the declining 
importance of agriculture; and the 
increasing service orientation of the 
economy. The share of employment 
in the non-agricultural private sector 
jumped from 34.1% in 2015 to 43.3% 
in 2018 (administrative data), but 
informal employment in this sector 
remained widespread with 30.3% of 
the 
workforce 
(LFS 
2017). 
Meanwhile, the share of the labour 
force employed in agriculture and in 
the public sector continued to decline. 
In agriculture, the share of the labour force fell from 42.4% in 2015 to 39% in 2018, and in 
the public sector, it fell from 15.5% in 2015 to 14.5% in 2018. Still, agricultural employment 
is relatively high in absolute terms. Agriculture is often a form of self-employment for people 
with no other employment options, and the high levels of agricultural employment keep 
productivity low. 
3.2. 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the 
Union 
Albania has made some progress and has some level of preparation in its capacity to cope 
with competitive pressure and market forces within the EU. Energy, transport and digital 
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
0
10
20
30
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Albania: Labour market trends (15-64 age group)
Unemployment rate (lhs)
Participation rate (rhs)
Employment rate (rhs)
Source: Instat


===== PAGE 51 =====
 
50 
 
infrastructure improved. However, Albania’s competitiveness is hindered by a lack of 
entrepreneurial and technological know-how and low education levels. This also hinders 
Albania’s integration into international value chains. Exports and regional integration are 
below potential. Efforts to improve education and training have led to some improvements, 
but reforms must continue to close the significant skills gap. Albania’s capacity for research, 
development and innovation remained low.  
In order to improve competitiveness and long-term growth, Albania should in particular: 
 increase spending on education and research in percentage of GDP and implementing the 
envisaged reforms to vocational education and training; 
 improve the planning and execution of public investment; 
 make better technical support services locally available for micro, small and medium-
sized enterprises to help them to invest, innovate and to export. 
Education and innovation 
Although education system outcomes have improved, they remained well below EU-
average and are inadequately tuned to private sector needs. From a low base, Albania 
improved its scoring in the OECD's 2015 PISA assessment strongly but still about half of the 
tested students showed less than basic proficiency in three main competences. Almost half of 
the children enrolled in lower secondary education (85% enrolment) did not successfully 
complete it. Although VET enrolment as share of upper secondary education increased from 
13% in 2013 to over 20% in the school year 2018-2019, only 11% of all youngsters between 
15 and 19 years are attending vocational schools. Government’s spending on education 
declined from 3.5% of GDP in 2013 to 2.4% of GDP in 2018, remaining below regional 
average and far below the appropriate level for a country with a large young population. As 
the Government’s education policy does not systematically take into account private sector 
needs and often fails to enforce quality standards in vocational training institutions, young 
graduates often do not meet private sector expectations, with only 46.9% graduates being in 
employment in the year following graduation. The implementation of the action plan that 
requires the involvement of the public and private sectors together with universities is lagging 
behind. 
The capacity for technological absorption, research, development and innovation 
remained low. Moreover, data on research spending is scarce; the few indicators available on 
research and innovation show a mixed picture: while the number of articles in scientific 
journals has declined, the number of patents and trademark registrations has increased, albeit 
from a very low level. The low research and technical extension capacity in the agricultural 
sector has not improved. 
Physical capital and quality of infrastructure 
Albania’s annual public investment averaged 5.3% of GDP since 2013 and its 
infrastructure improved significantly, but the infrastructure gap to the regional and the 
EU average levels remains large. 
Investment has accounted for roughly 
one quarter of GDP in recent years. 
Overall investment grew by 4.6% in 
2017, with about 40% invested in the 
electricity, gas and water sector. 
Private investment (including large 
foreign investments) in energy and 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
AL, 2006
EU, 2006
AL, 2016
EU, 2016
0
4
8
12
Albania: Selected indicators relative to population
Electricity production, GWh per 1000 inhabitants
Road length, km per 1000 inhabitants
Rail passenger-km per inhabitant, lhs
Source: Eurostat


===== PAGE 52 =====
 
51 
 
transport infrastructure has increased significantly in recent years. The IMF composite public 
infrastructure index of 2017 estimated the gap to the EU average infrastructure level at 70%. 
In particular, broadband internet coverage, highways and installed electricity generation 
capacity, though constantly increasing, were much below EU-levels and electricity outages 
remained frequent. The Albanian capital budget execution rate of 91% has been above the 
average of its regional peers in 2017. In 2018, the capital budget execution could not keep up 
with the planned high growth of public investment and fell to 88% which still represents an 
annual capital expenditure growth of 12%. Public investment management still suffers from 
institutional-capacity constraints, overoptimistic planning and backloading. The large 
infrastructure investment needs and the increasing number of PPPs require: (i) more 
financing; (ii) clear frameworks for regulated prices (electricity, water, toll fees); and (iii) 
improved institutional capacity in the public sector for planning and supervision. 
Sectoral and enterprise structure 
The Albanian economy shifted further to the services sector, followed by agriculture and 
industry. Services further increased their share in GDP from 45.8% in 2014 to 48%, in 2018 
led by trade and tourism related services and an increasing share of services in education and 
health. Agriculture as well as industry have lost some ground between 2014 and 2018 with 
shares decreasing from 23% to 18.4% and 14.8% to 12.2 respectively. The number of foreign 
enterprises in tourism, ICT and agriculture increased by almost 12% from 2016 to 2017. 
Most investment and employment depends on a very small number of enterprises. 89% 
of all enterprises in Albania had less than 5 employees in 2016 (‘micro-enterprises’) and only 
5% of all enterprises had over 10 employees. The latter account for 75% of formal 
employment and 86% of investment in the economy. The slow change in this structure in 
recent years signals persistent obstacles for enterprise growth. Many micro-enterprises cannot 
access microfinance due to their lack of know-how or because they operate in the informal 
economy, whereas many SMEs (with more than 5 employees) are too large for microfinance 
institutions, but also face problems accessing bank financing. The low level of public support 
to SMEs and farmers poses a challenge for businesses aspiring to grow or to export. 
Economic integration with the EU and price competitiveness 
The EU remained Albania’s main trading partner, but overall trade levels remained 
well below potential and undiversified. Albania’s total global exports increased by 17% in 
value in 2018, exceptionally dominated in this year by electricity exports. Over the last years, 
commercial services led by tourism dominated exports, accounting for 58% of global exports. 
Goods exports - mainly manufactured textiles and footwear - continued to show little 
diversification in terms of products and destinations, while the potential for agricultural 
exports remained untapped. The EU accounted for 76.3% of Albania’s goods exports and 
61.1% of its goods imports in 2018, slightly less than in 2017. Italy remained the main 
destination for Albanian exports and a major source of remittances. 
FDI inflows into Albania from the EU grew strongly over the last 2 years. FDI flows 
from the EU into Albania increased by 22% in 2016 and 44% in 2017. FDI from the EU 
accounted for 38.5% total FDI flows into Albania’s in 2017. Nevertheless, the EU’s share in 
Albanian FDI stocks declined from its peak of 66% in 2015 to 56% in 2017, partly due to a 
large build-up of FDI stocks in the energy sector by non-EU partners. Albania’s integration 
into global value chains is mostly limited to manufacturing services in the textile and 
footwear apparel industries for Italian lead firms (known as ‘cut, make and trim’ services). 
Albania’s trade with Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) countries increased 
on account of a continuously increasing share of exports to CEFTA countries, mainly to 


===== PAGE 53 =====
 
52 
 
Kosovo.  Exports to CEFTA increased from about 11% of its total exports in 2013 to about 
16% of total exports in 2018. Imports from CEFTA, in contrast, fell back to their 2016 level 
in 2018 at 6.7% of total Albanian imports while imports from other countries increased their 
share from 30.4% to 32.3%. 
 
 
4. 
 GOOD NEIGHBOURLY RELATIONS AND REGIONAL COOPERATION  
Good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation form an essential part of Albania’s 
European integration process. Albania has continued to participate actively in regional 
initiatives such as the South East European Cooperation Process, the Regional Cooperation 
Council, the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA), the Western Balkans Six, the 
Adriatic-Ionian Initiative, the Energy Community Treaty, the European Common Aviation 
Area Agreement, the Central European Initiative, the Regional Initiative for Migration and 
Asylum, the Regional School of Public Administration (ReSPA), and the ‘Brdo-Brijuni 
process’.  
Albania participated in the Western Balkans London Summit of July 2018 and hosted a 
follow-up meeting of Prime Ministers in Durres in August 2018 to support the 
implementation of the Multiannual Action Plan (MAP) for the Regional Economic Area. In 
this regard, more attention is needed to secure timely adoption of the incurred measures, as 
well as streamlining regional commitments into national policies. Tirana hosts both the 
Western Balkans Fund and the Regional Youth Cooperation offices. Dialogue with the 
Western Balkans continued in Skopje on the implementation of the Digital Agenda, to which 
all leaders of the region had committed through a statement of support. More particularly 
concerning the negotiations on roaming fees, a regional agreement was signed in Belgrade in 
April 2019 enabling Roam like at Home (RLAH) as of July 2021. 
Albania has continued to strengthen bilateral relations with the countries of the region, 
organising joint government meetings with many of them to deepen cooperation.  
Relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina remain overall positive, however with no bilateral 
exchanges at high level. Trade flows remain at a low level compared to other countries of the 
region.  
Albania reconfirmed its very good relations with Kosovo by signing several new agreements 
in key areas of cooperation during the fifth governments' meeting in November 2018 in Peja, 
Kosovo. In December 2018, Kosovo and Albania signed an agreement to establish joint 
border controls. Trade between the two in 2018 increased slightly above 20% compared to 
2017. Albania continued to advocate for Kosovo’s full participation to regional processes and 
to support the dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia. Any decision with respect to the 
management of border control must be in line with Integrated Border Management standards. 


===== PAGE 54 =====
 
53 
 
Any actions and statements that could be interpreted as going against good neighbourly 
relations must be avoided. 
Relations with Montenegro have further strengthened, in particular following the first joint 
government meeting in July 2018. In the framework of this meeting, 12 bilateral agreements 
were signed on migration and refugee flows as well as minority and security issues. Cross-
border cooperation was strengthened with projects to improve infrastructure on both sides of 
the border. Albania also cooperates with Montenegro under the Albania-Montenegro-Croatia 
Trilateral, established in 2017, as part of the Adriatic-Ionian dialogue. One trilateral meeting 
took place during the reporting period in July 2018.  
Relations with North Macedonia have intensified. Albania provided strong support to the 
agreement with Greece for resolving the name issue. Albania's Foreign Minister paid an 
official visit to Skopje in September 2018. A second joint government meeting is expected to 
take place with a focus on strengthening connectivity and mobility between the two countries. 
Albania ratified the protocol for the accession of North Macedonia to NATO. 
The relationship with Serbia remained overall positive. Regular exchanges took place 
between civil society organisations, youth and media actors. In May 2018, the two countries 
signed an agreement on tourism cooperation. Leaders of both countries regularly meet in the 
framework of regional and international events. Albania also cooperates with Serbia under the 
Albania-Serbia-Italy Trilateral.  
Albania further intensified its good relations with Turkey. In October, the Turkish Foreign 
Minister visited Albania and both countries committed to establish a High-Level Council of 
Cooperation, a cooperation mechanism similar to joint government meetings that Albania has 
with its neighbours in the region. Turkey remains the fifth largest trading partner of Albania 
and the sixth biggest foreign investor in the country. Turkey continued to provide education 
and training for the Albanian Army and security forces. After the coup attempt in July 2016, 
Turkey has been increasing pressure on Albania to deliver on dismantling the so-called 
Gulen/FETO structures in the country. The Marif Foundation, established by the Turkish 
government, is taking ownership of schools formerly owned by these structures.  
Relations with Greece remained generally positive but were strained by an incident in the 
ethnic Greek village of Bularat. Progress on outstanding bilateral issues continued with the 
implementation of the agreement on exhumation and burial of the remains of Greek soldiers 
fallen in Albania during the Second World War, the withdrawal of reservation by Greece on 
Albania’s accession to the Apostille Convention, an agreement on the process for the revision 
of school text books, and the signing of an agreement on the mutual recognition of driving 
licences. The third round of negotiations on maritime delimitation was held in June 2018. The 
two countries' Prime Ministers met in July 2018 and agreed to further continue the bilateral 
dialogue with the aim of concluding a strategic partnership agreement. Such progress should 
continue. 
Relations with Italy remained very good. Political dialogue intensified with visits on both 
sides. Cooperation on justice and home affairs was further strengthened, in particular in the 
fight against organised crime, drug trafficking, trafficking of human beings, irregular 
migration and asylum. Italy continued to provide key support for monitoring the state of 
cannabis cultivation in Albania. Italy remained Albania's first trading partner and one of 
Albania’s leading bilateral donors. 
 
 


===== PAGE 55 =====
 
54 
 
5.  
ABILITY TO ASSUME THE OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP 
5.1.  
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods 
The free movement of goods ensures that many products can be traded freely across the EU 
based on common rules and procedures. Where products are governed by national rules the 
principle of the free movement of goods prevents these creating unjustified barriers to trade. 
Albania has some level of preparation/is moderately prepared in the area of free movement 
of goods. There was some progress over the reporting period, in particular in the sectoral 
alignment with the ‘new and global approach’ product legislation and the accreditation of 
additional conformity assessment bodies. However, further efforts are needed to ensure 
legislative alignment and to strengthen enforcement.  
In the coming year, the country should in particular: 
 
→ continue to align its legislation with both the horizontal and sectoral acquis; 
→ further strengthen the enforcement capacity of the Market Surveillance Inspectorate. 
General principles 
There are still measures in place that affect the production, distribution and marketing of 
industrial products, notably related to: (i) price of products; (ii) import licences or permits 
for imported goods; and (iii) the obligation to have storage facilities in specific areas. Further 
efforts towards alignment with the acquis are set out in the 2016-2020 national plan for 
European integration, as well as in the 2020 consumer protection and market surveillance 
strategy. However, there is no specific strategy on the free movement of goods. 
Non-harmonised area 
Despite the completion of the methodology for comparative analysis of Albanian legislation, 
an action plan on the screening of national technical regulations for compliance with Articles 
34-36 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union is still being prepared. 
Harmonised area: quality infrastructure 
Legislation in the area of accreditation and market surveillance is partially aligned with the 
EU acquis. Administrative structures are in place for dealing with technical regulations, 
standardisation, conformity assessment, metrology, accreditation, and market surveillance as 
subordinate bodies under the Ministry of Finance and Economy and the Ministry of Tourism 
and Environment. Recruitment of more specialised staff to the Market Surveillance 
Inspectorate is ongoing. Mutual cooperation agreements on accreditation, standardisation and 
conformity assessment are in place with countries in the region and other non-EU countries. 
On standardisation, the General Directorate of Standardisation (GDS) is a full member of 
the European Telecommunication Standards Institute (ETSI), an affiliate member of the 
European Committee for Standardisation (CEN) and of the European Committee for 
Electrotechnical Standardisation (CENELEC), and an associate member of the International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). All national standards are adopted in full conformity 
with European standards (CEN, CENELEC and ETSI standards). During the reporting period, 
1655 European and international standards were adopted (including: 730 CEN, 339 
CENELEC, 216 ETSI, 313 ISO, and 57 IEC). In total, the GDS adopted about 97% of total 
standards issued by CEN and CENELEC. 
The 2014 Law on the accreditation of conformity assessment bodies is partly aligned with 
the acquis. It regulates the functioning of the General Directorate of Accreditation (GDA), its 
accreditation board, its technical committees and other procedural issues. In 2018 there are 73 


===== PAGE 56 =====
 
55 
 
accredited conformity assessment bodies (compared to 58 in the previous reporting period): 
45 laboratories, 19 inspection bodies and 9 certification bodies. In April 2018, the GDA 
became a signatory of the European Cooperation for Accreditation Multi-Lateral Agreement 
(EA MLA) in the fields of Inspection and Management Systems Certification, and remains an 
EA MLA signatory in the field of testing. Since July 2018, GDA has been  a full member of 
the International Laboratory Accreditation Organisation Mutual Recognition Agreement 
(ILAC MRA) in the field of inspection and a mutual recognition agreement was signed 
between ILAC and GDA. Albania launched an electronic system for accreditation procedures 
in October 2018. The General Directorate of Metrology has maintained its capacity of 104 
employees.  
The State Inspectorate for Market Surveillance (SIMS) currently has 45 staff, down from 50 
in the previous year. SIMS should significantly increase staff numbers, including inspectors. 
SIMS carried out more than 700 inspections in 2018. As a result, 67 administrative measures 
were taken, out of which 10 were emergency measures related to dangerous products (mainly 
toys and electrical goods), which resulted in these products being withdrawn from the market. 
Harmonised area: sectoral legislation 
For the ‘new and global Approach’ product legislation, the Albanian legal framework is 
designed to be fully aligned with the  acquis in the following sectors: lifts (following a 
decision by the government adopted during the reporting period), machinery, personal 
protective equipment, gas appliances, pressure equipment, simple pressure equipment, 
outdoor equipment noise, toys, energy labelling (following decision of the government 
adopted during the reporting period), and measuring instruments. However, alignment has not 
yet started on low voltage equipment, cableways, electromagnetic compatibility, radio and 
telecoms equipment, aerosol dispensers, explosive atmospheres equipment, construction 
products, recreational craft, eco-design, and non-automatic weighing instruments. 
On civil explosives and pyrotechnic articles, alignment has not started. 
For ‘old Approach’ product legislation, the Law on chemical management is partly aligned 
with the Regulation concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of 
Chemicals (REACH) and other related parts of the acquis. National legislation on chemical 
classification, labelling and packaging is designed to be aligned with the United Nations 
Globally Harmonised System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals.  
On drug precursors, the list of controlled substances complies with the lists in the relevant 
EU acquis. There is partial alignment in the area of procedural measures, notably on 
firearms, textile labelling and mixtures, and pricing of medicinal products. The legislation on 
defence products and on return of cultural objects unlawfully removed from the territory 
of a Member State is still not aligned with the acquis.  
5.2.  
Chapter 2: Free movement of workers 
Citizens of one Member State have the right to work in another Member State and must be 
given the same working and social conditions as other workers.  
Albania is at some level of preparation in freedom of movement for workers. Some 
progress was achieved in this area, in particular by the conclusion of new social security 
bilateral agreements.  
In the coming year, Albania should: 
 align its legislation with the EU acquis in the area of freedom of movement for workers; 
 develop the IT system to enable connection to EURES; 


===== PAGE 57 =====
 
56 
 
 negotiate and implement new bilateral agreements on social security, notably with EU 
Member States. 
On access to the labour market, EU citizens are eligible to work in Albania without a work 
permit. This is in line with pursuant to provisions of the Law on foreigners and subsequent 
amendments, which provide that foreigners will not need a work permit or business 
registration certificate if they are nationals of an EU Member State or Schengen country 
legally residing in Albania. The appropriateness of social security schemes and forfeit of 
occupational pensions are regulated through bilateral agreements. Immigration admission 
policies do not place obstacles to the permanent settlement of EU workers’ family members. 
Nevertheless, there are limitations as regards family members of Union citizens who are not 
nationals of an EU member state, in terms of being entitled to take up employment or self-
employment.  
Regarding the preparation made for joining EURES (European network of employment 
services), Albania has set-up an integrated database for its employment services system. This 
will facilitate exchanges of information between IT departments on the civil status, the tax 
system, the compulsory healthcare system and the economic assistance system. A new service 
system still needs to be developed to enable the connection to EURES. 
On the coordination of social security systems, bilateral agreements on social security are in 
place with Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Luxembourg, Hungary, Austria, 
Romania, North Macedonia and Turkey. Negotiations with Switzerland and Canada have 
been completed. The agreement with Kosovo was ratified in April 2019 is expected to 
become active three months later. There have been exchanges on coordinating social security 
schemes with Bulgaria, Spain, France and Croatia. A technical cooperation agreement has 
been set up to continue negotiations for a bilateral agreement on coordination of social 
security schemes with Italy. Negotiation and implementation of new bilateral agreements on 
social security, between Albania and EU Member States remains to be fostered.  
5.3.  
Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services 
EU natural and legal persons have the right to establish themselves in any Member State and 
to provide cross-border services. For certain regulated professions, there are rules on mutual 
recognition of qualifications. The postal services market has been opened up to competition 
since 2017. 
Albania is moderately prepared in the right of establishment and freedom to provide 
services. Indeed, Albania demonstrated good progress in the alignment with the general 
framework set out in the EC Services Directive. There was some progress during the 
reporting period, especially in the area of provision of services in the legal sector. In the 
coming year, the country should in particular: 
 finalise screening of the existing legislation to identify barriers to the freedom of 
establishment and free movement of services with a view to further aligning its legislation 
with the Services Directive; 
 continue the test phase for a future fully operational Point of Single Contact; 
 step up efforts to align its legislation with the EU acquis and ensure appropriate  
institutional capacity in the area of mutual recognition of professional qualifications. 
On barriers to the freedom of establishment or the free movement of services, the 
legislation on mining, taxation and social policy is broadly aligned with the Services 
Directive. However, the legislation on the veterinary sector still requires amendments for the 


===== PAGE 58 =====
 
57 
 
licensing of private veterinary clinics and hospitals. During the reporting period, some 
progress was achieved in the legal sector with the approval of the Law on the legal profession. 
The legislation in this area is partially aligned with the EU acquis, but restrictions exist in 
particular for public notaries and private bailiffs. The screening process is ongoing for other 
sectors. 
On the freedom to provide cross-border services, the National Business Centre functions as 
a one-stop-shop for registering businesses and issuing licences, authorisations and permits. It 
operates through service windows throughout the country, as well as the electronic service 
window on the e-Albania portal. Albania needs to ensure a fully operational Point of Single 
Contact.  
On postal services, legislation is fully aligned with EU postal acquis, apart from the 
Regulation on cross-border parcel delivery services. The postal market has been open to 
competition since 2017. There is one universal service provider, Albanian Post S.A. and 11 
other postal service providers in the market. The Electronic and Postal Communication 
Authority (AKEP) is the independent national regulator for the postal market. A new postal 
strategy for 2019-2024 is in a preparatory phase. 
On mutual recognition of professional qualifications, no progress was made during the 
reporting period in the alignment of the professional qualifications framework with the EU 
acquis in the area. The Albanian authorities should strengthen institutional capacity for the 
mutual recognition of professional qualifications. 
5.4. 
 Chapter 4: Free movement of capital 
In the EU, capital and investments must be able to move without restriction and there are 
common rules for cross-border payments. Banks and other economic operators apply certain 
rules to support the fight against money laundering and terrorist financing. 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of free movement of capital. Some progress was 
made in the reporting period, particularly in the area of payment systems, through the 
adoption of the policy document "payment and settlement systems" and the preparation of the 
Strategy on Retail Payment System.  
In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
 swiftly implement the recommendations of the Moneyval report and continue to align 
with the EU acquis on anti-money laundering/countering terrorism financing;  
 take short- and medium-term measures to implement the action plan on acquisition of land 
by foreigners, which is a commitment in the SAA that is outstanding since 2016. 
On capital movements and payments, the Law on Strategic Investments provides special 
protection to foreign investments. No progress has been made on the adoption of the unified 
Law on Investments. Acquisition of real estate by foreigners remains subject to restrictions: 
they are not allowed to acquire agricultural land, forests, meadows and pastures. Albania is 
late in delivering on its commitment under the 2006 Stabilisation and Association Agreement 
(SAA) to amend the regime for the acquisition of property by EU citizens/entities, which is a 
step due since 2016. Provisions regulating the acquisition of real estate by foreigners remain 
unchanged and uncertainties over real estate ownership rights continue to discourage 
investment. 
As regards payment systems, foreign banks have the right to open branches and agencies in 
Albania and to offer cross-border payments. Non-cash payments are governed by the Bank of 


===== PAGE 59 =====
 
58 
 
Albania Regulation on the payment system and instruments. The legal and regulatory 
framework for electronic payments in Albania is the same for national and cross-border 
payments. In May 2018, the Bank of Albania Supervisory Council adopted the revision of the 
oversight policy document for payment and settlement systems with the objective to align the 
classification criteria of the payment systems according to the EU definition. The National 
Payment System Committee opened up its participation to representatives from non-bank 
financial institutions and from the payment system operators and presented the Strategy on 
Albania’s National Retail Payments Strategy for 2018-2023.  
As regards the fight against money laundering, the mutual evaluation report of Albania 
discussed at Moneyval in July triggered Albania’s referral to the International Cooperation 
Review Group. This development puts Albania at risk of being listed by the Financial Action 
Task Force of February 2020 among the jurisdictions with strategic deficiencies in their 
regime of anti-money laundering/countering terrorist financing. Albania should address 
Moneyval’s recommendations by September 2019. The Committee for Coordination on the 
Fight against Money Laundering, chaired by the Prime Minister, adopted an Action Plan in 
September 2018, which attributed responsibilities to all relevant ministries and services. In 
implementation, new amendments to the Anti Money Laundering Law are being prepared 
which will also aim at aligning with the latest EU acquis. Albania is working on amending 
three legal acts related to the National Business Centre; assets’ confiscation; and tax 
procedures. The National Business Centre is working on an assessment of best practices on 
establishment of beneficial ownership register. 
The General Directorate for the Prevention of Money Laundering (the Albanian Financial 
Intelligence Unit or FIU) is now fully staffed with 39 staff.  
The number of suspicious transaction reports the FIU collected for the period January 2018-
February 2019 increased to 1,659 compared to 1,384 for 2017. The FIU referred 396 cases to 
law enforcement authorities.  
5.5.  
Chapter 5: Public procurement 
EU rules ensure that public procurement of goods, services and works in any Member State is 
transparent and open to all EU companies on the basis of non-discrimination and equal 
treatment. 
Albania has some level of preparation in public procurement. Some progress was made in 
the past year, in particular by enhancing the capacity of the Public Procurement Agency. 
Further efforts are needed to improve compliance with procedures and prevent corruption in 
the procurement cycle. The Commission’s recommendations from 2018 were not fully 
implemented and remain valid. 
In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
 ensure further alignment with the 2014 directives on EU public procurement, including in 
the area of utilities and concessions, as well as with the EU Defence Procurement 
Directive; 
 ensure adequate administrative capacity in contracting authorities and the supreme audit 
institution; 
 adopt a public procurement strategy in line with the overarching public financial 
management strategy.  
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
The legal framework on public procurement is largely in line with: (i) 2004 EU directives on 


===== PAGE 60 =====
 
59 
 
‘classic’ and utilities procurement; and (ii) relevant administrative and budget provisions. The 
Law on public procurement specifies the principles of transparency, equal treatment and non-
discrimination. However, further alignment is needed with the 2014 EU public procurement 
directives, which replaced the 2004 ones in the EU. The Law on concessions and public-
private partnerships is partly aligned with the Directive on the award of concession contracts. 
All legal and financial instruments used in the area of public procurement and concessions, 
including inter-governmental agreements concluded with third countries for the 
implementation of joint projects, should  comply with  the principles of transparency, 
competition, equal treatment and non-discrimination. Legislation in the field of defence 
procurement remains to be aligned with the relevant EU Directive. 
The mid-term review of the public financial management strategy was completed in March 
2019. The revised public investment management guidelines approved in March 2018 require 
full and effective implementation. A strategic framework for public procurement is being 
prepared but remains to be adopted, according to the public financial management strategy. 
The Public Procurement Agency (PPA) is the central public procurement entity mandated to 
monitor compliance public procurement rules. It provides information, support and guidance 
to contracting authorities. In 2018, the PPA increased staffing from 29 to 44 posts, 15 of 
which are vacant.  
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
The planning and preparation of public procurement procedures generally comply with 
transparency and efficiency principles, and public procurement forecasts are routinely 
published. Following new instructions and close monitoring, the number of negotiated 
procedures without prior publication decreased in 2018 to 531 from 2,234. In terms of volume 
these procedures represented 4.1% of all the  awarded procedures. The use of framework 
agreements expanded from 61 in 2017 to 627 in 2018. For categories of common use goods 
and services the centralised procurement body in the Ministry of Interior was turned into an 
agency in February 2018, thus providing intermediary functions following the new EU 
directives. 
Albania has a central electronic public procurement portal for the publication of tender 
and contract notices as well as other important information and guidance. The use of the 
portal is mandatory, including for low-value procurement. Since January 2018, standard 
tendering documents for each type of procedure and contract are published on the PPA 
website, and the procurement forecast register is prepared and submitted online. 
By the end of 2018, the concessions registry contains information on 218 public-private 
partnerships (PPPs), six of which signed in 2018. Although required by law, value-for-money 
analysis is still not systematically carried out before approval of all PPPs. Furthermore, there 
is no regular reporting on PPPs. The technical skills and capacity to design and assess 
concessions and PPP projects need to be further developed.  
The PPA has recently strengthened its monitoring role, and applies a monitoring system to 
assess procurement performance and procurement compliance. The monitoring system is 
based on a variety of performance indicators. There is still a need for: (i) further support to 
contracting authorities; (ii) a strengthening of the e-procurement system; (iii) monitoring of 
contract implementation; and (iv) analysis of market trends in public procurement. 
The contracting authorities lack the capacity to manage public procurement procedures 
effectively. Compliance is still generally weak, especially in procedures that are more 
complex. The PPA has already issued instructions on the declaration of conflicts of interest by 
procurement officials. In addition to these instructions, the PPA adopted and published a 


===== PAGE 61 =====
 
60 
 
regulation on prevention of conflict of interest situations during the exercise of the public 
functions in the PPA. The State Audit Institution reports a substantial number of irregularities 
in public procurement with an estimated financial loss to the state budget of around EUR 3.7 
million in 2018 compared to EUR 12 million in 2017 and, EUR 25.6 million in 2016.  
During the reporting period, the Commission received a number of complaints alleging the 
breach of rules on public procurement laid down in the SAA. No such a breach has been 
established in checks done so far. Albania is expected to continue providing relevant 
information in the context of the various technical engagements. 
Efficient remedies system   
The right to legal remedy is set out in the Constitution and the Law on public procurement in 
a way that is mostly in line with the Remedies Directive. Provisions on the ineffectiveness of 
contracts, alternative punishments and ex ante voluntary transparency notices are still not  
covered by Albanian law. The remedy system is easily accessible to economic operators 
without discrimination. However, the complainant must pay a 0.5% fee of the budget of the 
procurement procedure which is refunded once the complaint is accepted and granted. For 
refused complaints the fee is transferred to the state budget. 
Following amendments to the Law on public procurement adopted in 2017, which 
strengthened the independence of the Public Procurement Commission (PPC), all PPC 
members were appointed in June 2018. The PPC carries out administrative reviews of public 
tenders. Most of PPC decisions are corrective. They can be challenged in the Administrative 
Court. 
Most initial complaints lodged with the contracting authority that awarded the contract are 
dismissed, thus forcing the complainants to appeal to the PPC. Processing of complaints 
within the legal time limit remains a challenge. Setting up an electronic database for PPC 
judgments would improve the transparency of the review system. 
Although the remedy procedure is largely in place, the capacity of the PPC and the 
Administrative Court to deal with the complexity and increasing number of appeals still needs 
to be greatly increased. Specialised training courses on topics related to public procurement 
are recommended. 
5.6.  
Chapter 6: Company law 
The EU has common rules on the formation, registration and disclosure requirements of a 
company, with complementary rules for accounting and financial reporting, and statutory 
audit. 
Albania is moderately prepared in the field of company law. Some progress was made 
towards alignment with the acquis in the corporate accounting area through the adoption of a 
new accounting law.  
In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ ensure full transparency of company financial statements in the business register; 
→ ensure implementation of the new Law on accounting and financial statements.  
Overall, some acquis alignment has been achieved in a range of company law areas, 
including takeovers and cross-border mergers, albeit none during the reporting period. The 
National Business Centre is responsible for company registration, allowing free online 
registration and online access to data. The quality of financial reporting remains to be 
improved. 


===== PAGE 62 =====
 
61 
 
In the area of corporate accounting, the newly adopted Law on accounting and financial 
statements aims at partial alignment with the EU Accounting Directive and defines new 
thresholds for company size, sets requirements for preparing the activity management report 
including medium sized companies and exempts small entities from the obligation for detailed 
disclosures. Furthermore, large and public-interest economic entities active in the extractive 
or logging industries shall prepare and make public an annual report on payments made to 
public institutions. The Law also strengthens the competence of the National Accounting 
Council to monitor the enforcement of financial reporting and accounting standards.  
On auditing, the Public Oversight Board (POB), established as an independent regulatory 
authority with its own financing resources, is the competent authority that ensures quality 
assurance. Regulations were adopted on exam testing and evaluation of statutory auditors and 
certified accountants (May 2018), and on defining the procedures and methodology for the 
quality assurance of the statutory audit of public-interest entities (PIE) and non-PIEs (October 
2018). The Council of Ministers adopted secondary legislation on the definition of PIEs in 
January 2019 to allow for full implementation of the provision under the Law on statutory 
audit. International Standards on Auditing are applied. Further efforts are required to align 
with the most recent acquis on statutory audit, and to strengthen the capacity of audit 
oversight structures and the professional independence and objectivity of auditors. 
5.7.  
Chapter 7: Intellectual property law 
The EU has harmonised rules for the legal protection of intellectual property rights (IPR) and 
of copyright and related rights. Rules for the legal protection of IPRs cover, for instance, 
patents and trademarks, designs, biotechnological inventions and pharmaceuticals. Rules for 
the legal protection of copyright and related rights cover, for instance, books, films, computer 
programmes and broadcasting. 
Albania has some level of preparation/is moderately prepared on intellectual property 
rights. Some progress was made during the reporting period, in particular, with the legislative 
alignment with the EU acquis in the area of industrial property rights as well as in improving 
the functioning of collective management agencies. Recommendations from the previous year 
were partially met and remain valid. 
In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ intensify the efforts to align its legislation on copyright and neighbouring rights with the 
EU acquis;  
 further improve the functioning of collective management agencies and the payment of 
royalties to right holders.  
In the area of copyright and neighbouring rights, the National Copyright Council adopted 
two decisions during the reporting period to further align the legal framework with the acquis 
in the area of methodology on remuneration tariffs in the collective management system. 
Collective management agencies (CMOs) revised their statutory acts to enhance transparency, 
accountability and better distribution to the right holders.  Furthermore, to increase the 
contributory base and the usability of tariffs collected by CMOs, the SUADA one-stop-shop 
was created during the reporting period. 
The two main entities responsible for intellectual property are the General Directorate of 
Industrial Property in charge of registering, administrating and promoting IP objects and the 
Copyright Directorate. In 2018, a new specialised decision-making collegial body was 
established, the National Copyright Council, consisting of five members appointed by the 
Minister of Culture. It is responsible for certifying the methodology for the tariffs. 


===== PAGE 63 =====
 
62 
 
On industrial property rights, the government adopted secondary legislation in May 2018 
on trademarks and the legal protection of designs. The aim of this legislation was to complete 
the alignment of the legal framework with the EU acquis in these areas. Another government 
decision that was adopted during the reporting period aims at further aligning legislation on 
patents for inventions and utility models with the EU acquis. 
In 2018, the number of applications to register trademarks rose by 24.4% compared to 2017 
and applications for patents and utility models increased by 11.7%. As regards enforcement, 
during the reporting period, the General Directorate of Industrial Property participated in 27 
court proceedings.  
In 2018, the copyright division of SIMS  carried out 401 inspections in total. These 
inspections resulted in 105 administrative measures, made up of 98 fines and seven warnings. 
For the same period, the industrial property division of SIMS carried out 336 inspections in 
total. These inspections resulted in 76 administrative measures (71 were warnings and five 
were fines). 
Furthermore, during the reporting period the customs administration suspended the release of 
the 8 334 products suspected of infringing an intellectual property right. However, there are 
still concerns about the high number of counterfeit products in the country. 
5.8.  
Chapter 8: Competition policy 
EU rules protect free competition. They include antitrust rules against restrictive agreements 
between companies and abuse of dominant position, and also include rules on concentrations 
between companies which would significantly impede competition. EU rules also set out a 
system of State aid control. Governments are only allowed to grant State aid if restrictive 
conditions are met, with a view to preventing distortion of competition. 
Albania has some level of preparation / is moderately prepared in competition policy. 
There was some progress during the reporting period, in particular on legislative alignment 
with the acquis. However, significant efforts are needed to further improve legislative 
alignment with the acquis and enforcement of State aid rules. In line with previous 
recommendations, the operational independence of the State aid Commission (SAC) has not 
yet been ensured. Furthermore, the SAC needs to redouble efforts to improve its enforcement 
record. 
In the coming year, the country should in particular: 
 significantly increase the administrative capacity of SAC’s secretariat, which currently 
raises serious concerns; 
 ensure the operational independence of the SAC; 
 raise awareness of the SAC with respect to line ministries,  regional and local authorities 
in order to ensure prior notification of aid measures  and strengthen the enforcement of 
State aid rules. 
Antitrust and mergers 
The legislative framework is broadly in line with the acquis and the Stabilisation and 
Association Agreement. The Law on protection of competition is largely aligned with the 
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union’s (TFEU) Article 101 on restrictive 
agreements and Article 102 on abuses of dominant position. The Law on protection of 
competition also provides for prior control of mergers, in line with the Merger Regulation. 
Implementing legislation is broadly in line with the relevant EU regulations and Commission 
guidelines. In 2018, the Albanian Competition Authority (ACA) approved guidelines on 


===== PAGE 64 =====
 
63 
 
restrictions directly related and necessary to concentrations, implementing the related 
Commission Notice of 2005. In addition, among others, the ACA has recently adopted 
guidelines relating to the telecommunications sector in accordance with EU competition rules. 
On the institutional framework, the ACA is responsible for implementing the Law on 
protection of competition. Formally, the ACA is an operationally independent authority 
reporting to Parliament, which appoints its chair and the four board members. The ACA can 
adopt secondary legislation, impose fines and remedies, prohibit mergers, or authorise them 
with or without conditions. It can conduct sector enquiries and, at its own initiative, issue 
opinions and recommendations on draft laws that may affect competition. A leniency 
programme for companies providing information on cartel cases is in place. Parties may 
appeal the ACA’s decisions before the courts. The ACA has undergone structural 
reorganizations, as approved by the Albanian Parliament, in 2017 and 2018. 
Regarding administrative capacity, the ACA has an appropriate number of staff. The staff’s 
level of expertise has been strengthened through trainings. On enforcement, the ACA 
adopted 57 decisions during the reporting period. These included six decisions on abuse of 
dominant position and 22 decisions on concentration control. In addition, ACA adopted three 
decisions on the assessment of draft sectoral legislation affecting competition. The total 
amount of fees imposed amounted to 6.5 million lek. The ACA should continue to strengthen 
the enforcement of competition rules. 
State aid 
The legislative framework is broadly in line with the acquis and with the Stabilisation and 
Association Agreement. Amended in 2016, the Law on State aid largely reflects Articles 107 
and 108 of the TFEU. Legislation was adopted on the conditions and procedures for granting 
State aid. This legislation aims to partially align Albania’s legislation with the 2014 General 
Block Exemption Regulation. Further alignment with implementing EU legislation on State 
aid control is still needed. 
On institutional framework, the State Aid Commission (SAC) is responsible for 
implementing the Law on State aid. The Ministry of Finance and Economy, which is an aid-
granting institution, continues to determine its organisational set-up. This means that the SAC 
cannot be considered an operationally independent authority, as required by the SAA. The 
Law on State aid provides that new aid measures must be notified to the SAC and found to be 
compatible by it before they can be put in place. The SAC can order the recovery of illegal 
and incompatible aid, even if no recovery has been ordered so far. Its decisions can be 
appealed in court. 
The enforcement capacity of the SAC’s secretariat raises serious concerns, as it is currently 
insufficient and needs to be significantly strengthened. It has yet to be shown that the Law on 
State aid is being implemented effectively. The record of enforcement of State aid control is 
very low. During the reporting period, the SAC assessed 10 State aid schemes, of which four 
were ex-officio cases. No negative decisions were taken. It is important that State aid rules are 
reflected in the public financial management strategy. It is also important to increase the 
SAC’s advisory role for line ministries and for regional and local authorities. The 
implementation of the State aid rules should be further monitored in large projects between 
Albania and other countries. Advocacy among aid grantors must be stepped up to achieve 
prior notification of aid measures to the SAC. 
Liberalisation 
The legal framework provided by the Law on State aid is applicable to all legal or natural 
persons that perform an economic activity. There has been no investigation of State aid for 


===== PAGE 65 =====
 
64 
 
public undertakings or undertakings with special or exclusive rights. Albania needs to 
demonstrate more visibly its enforcement of the rules on financing services of general 
economic interest. 
5.9. 
Chapter 9: Financial services 
EU rules aim at ensuring fair competition between and the stability of financial institutions, 
namely banking, insurance, supplementary pensions, investment services and securities 
markets. They include rules on authorisation, operation and supervision of these institutions. 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of financial services. Some progress was made 
in addressing banking supervision and in further aligning the legislation with the Solvency II 
Directive, as recommended in the 2018 report.  
In the coming year, Albania should: 
 align its legislation with the EU capital requirements framework corresponding to Basel 
III and continue with the implementation of macro-prudential policy and the resolution 
framework; 
 ensure the full implementation of the non-performing loan resolution strategy; 
 accelerate the adoption of the amendments to the Law on compulsory insurance in the 
transport sector. 
As regards banks and financial conglomerates, the Bank of Albania (BoA) has continued to 
further align the banking regulation and supervisory manual with Basel II and Basel III. In 
2018, a Resolution Fund has been established and is operational. Regulations on resolution 
plans and on the cooperation between the Supervision Department and Resolution Department 
in the BoA were adopted. A Cooperation Agreement between the BoA and the Single 
Resolution Board has been signed. Guidelines and regulations aiming at further alignment 
with the relevant EU acquis on capital adequacy, licensing and activity, risk management, 
reporting by savings and loan associations, and transparency for banking and financial 
product services are in place. Albania has a system of identification of systemically important 
banks in place that is similar to EU practice. The BoA is working on the introduction of the 
Liquidity Coverage Ratio in the liquidity risk management regulatory framework in line with 
Basel III requirements. The non-performing loan ratio continued to decrease from 13.4% in 
January 2018 to 11.3% in January 2019, mainly due to write-offs and some loan restructuring. 
Full implementation of the Non-performing Loans Resolution Strategy requires further 
actions with regards to improvements in credit registry, as well as the full implementation of 
the bankruptcy law. The efficiency of the collateral execution system is currently the subject 
of court proceedings. The joint guidance issued in September by Ministers in charge of 
finances and justice on fees for bailiff services is challenged by the Chamber of Bailiff 
Offices. 
In the area of insurance and occupational pensions, amendments to the Law on Compulsory 
Insurance in the transport sector still need to be adopted. The secondary legislation to further 
align with the Solvency I and Solvency II Directives is in place and the implementation of the 
Strategy on consumers and investors' confidence in the supervised markets continued. In 
April 2018, the Albanian Financial Supervisory Authority adopted the 2018-2022 strategy on 
the development of AFSA and the markets under its supervision.  
In the area of financial market infrastructure the Albanian Stock Exchange, a private entity, 
operates only in the field of government securities while the public stock exchange remains 
suspended. A Central Securities Depository (AFISAR) is in place, which supports the process 


===== PAGE 66 =====
 
65 
 
of settlement and registration of Government securities and is operated by the Bank of 
Albania. The expiry period for privatisation vouchers was extended until December 2020. 
As regards the securities markets and investment services, the issuance of bonds by 
companies has been authorised for private offerings to institutional investors, their 
shareholders or individuals. Liquidity requirements for investment funds were strengthened.  
5.10.  Chapter 10: Information society and media 
The EU supports the smooth functioning of the internal market for electronic 
communications, electronic commerce and audio-visual services. The rules protect consumers 
and support universal availability of modern services. 
Albania is moderately prepared in the field of information society and audio-visual media. 
Some progress was made on the digital agenda strategy and e-government services. No 
progress was achieved in the finalisation of the digital switchover, which remains to be 
finalised, along with the revision of the national broadband plan with clear objectives and 
targets, as well as in implementing the European emergency number 112, as already 
recommended in the 2018 report. 
In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
 adopt the necessary amendments to the Law on Electronic Communication, in alignment 
with the new European Electronic Communications Code, and prepare an action plan for the 
digital agenda.   
On electronic communications and information and communications technologies (ICT), 
little progress was made in implementing the single European emergency number 112 as 
planned in the 2015-2020 public order strategy. The unified 112 emergency number currently 
operates only in the region of Tirana and further efforts are required to extend it to the whole 
country. A new organisational structure for the Authority for Postal and Electronic Research 
has been approved with an increase of staff from 73 to 85 employees (74 are already 
employed). Fixed internet broadband penetration is low, with approximately 38% of 
households being connected. There is a huge gap in fixed internet-broadband penetration 
between urban and rural areas. Rural areas account for 40% of the population but only 1% out 
of this is connected to the internet. The mobile penetration rate reached 68% compared to 
72% at the end of 2017. In 2018 the number of active users of mobile broadband was about 
1.8 million, which results in an annual decrease of about 10.9%. The volume of data usage 
during 2018 has increased by 30% compared with 2017. 
In the area of information society services, the cross-sectoral strategy on Albania’s digital 
agenda for 2015-2020 and the plan for broadband development are being implemented. A 
new action plan for information society services for 2018-2020 needs to be approved. 
Revision of the national broadband plan is scheduled to be completed by the end of 2019. 
Authorities took part in the preparations of the Regional Roaming Agreement and signed the 
agreement in April 2019. The Law on cyber security was adopted in February 2017 and is 
partly aligned with the Directive on security of network and information systems. The 
Decision of Council of Ministers “On approval of the list of critical information 
infrastructures” was approved in 2018 together with the necessary secondary legislation. As 
part of the European Commission’s mapping of ‘digital innovation hubs’, out of 3 eligible 
hubs that were registered, 2 are still operational while 1 has been deactivated due to 
institutional restructuring. The national cybersecurity strategy still needs to be adopted.  
In order to monitor progress made by Albania towards the compliance with the European 
Union rules for electronic communications and information society services and convergence 


===== PAGE 67 =====
 
66 
 
with the internal market, as well as the alignment with the Digital Agenda for the Western 
Balkans, the country needs to improve the collection of statistical data on digital performance 
and digital competitiveness. 
In the field of audio-visual policy, the digital switchover continues to be postponed with a 
new deadline set by Audio-visual Media Authority (AMA) of September 2019. The 
infrastructure to access digital broadcasting is mostly in place already. However, the AMA 
has postponed the deadline for the digital switchover in the major districts of Tirana and 
Durres due to the scarcity of DVB-T2 digital decoders in the market and the associated public 
discontent. These events indicated shortcomings in the AMA's management of the process 
and lack of public awareness about the digital switchover. The so-called digital dividend (high 
quality radio spectrum that was formerly used by analogue broadcasters) DD 1 is now freed 
from analogue broadcasters. However, digital broadcasters still occupy the frequency. AMA 
must ensure that the digital dividend is de facto freed from other uses. This will enable the 
government to put on sale the freed frequencies to broadband services and thus generate 
income. During the reporting period, the AMA’s financial and human capacities were 
reinforced.   
5.11.  Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development 
The common agricultural policy supports farmers and rural development. This requires 
strong management and control systems. There are also common EU rules for quality policy 
and organic farming. 
Albania has some level of preparation in agriculture and rural development. During the 
reporting period, there was good progress on establishing the structures for the Instrument for 
Pre-accession Assistance for Rural Development programme (IPARD II). As a result, the 
Commission has fully entrusted these structures with budget implementation tasks for three 
measures in October 2018. There was good progress in reforming the advisory system.  
In the coming year, the Albanian authorities should in particular:  
 develop the Integrated Administration and Control System (IACS), including the 
improvement of farm and animal registers, and adopt an implementation plan for Farm 
Accountancy Data Network (FADN) registers, with the aim of providing consistent, 
systematic and validated data;  
 ensure administrative capacity required for the entrustment of the remaining measures 
under IPARD II programme and full absorption of IPARD II programme funding; 
 complete the legal framework for organic products and protected designations of origin, 
geographical indications and traditional specialities guaranteed, as well as on vineyards 
and wine, and ensure the institutional and administrative capacity for its implementation. 
As regards horizontal issues, the Agricultural and Rural Development Agency (ARDA) is the 
structure implementing the national support schemes in agriculture and rural development, 
also entrusted with budget implementation tasks under the IPARD II programme (2016-
2020). Continuous building of capacity of national authorities, including ARDA, will be 
required to receive entrustment for implementation of new measures under the IPARD 
programme. Strong cooperation among responsible national authorities should be ensured. 
Preparing the entrustment for implementation of the measure on Technical Assistance is 
overdue and should be prioritised as it can provide significant benefits to the authorities for 
the implementation of IPARD II programme.   


===== PAGE 68 =====
 
67 
 
There has been no progress related to the building of a Land Parcel Identification System 
(LPIS). Given progress made in the restitution of land, the Albanian authorities should start 
the process as soon as possible. The Integrated Administration and Control System (IACS) 
has yet to be fully implemented, but certain elements of it – such as a farmer register and an 
animal register – have been developed. There is no Farm Accountancy Data Network (FADN) 
in place and preparatory work on setting it up has not started. The Albanian authorities should 
start preparations, e.g. to adopt an implementation plan with a concrete timeline.  
Overall, direct payments in 2018 increased in comparison to 2017. The existing direct 
payments are coupled to production and not linked to cross-compliance rules; however, the 
majority of support is linked to investments. The farm advisory service at regional level is 
currently reorganised in four main regions. Five technology transfer centres, specialised in 
different agricultural products will remain under the authority of the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development. The reform of the advisory system should be completed, based on a 
clear strategy. 
Regarding sector-specific common market organisation schemes, market measures, 
production quotas or export refunds, in 2018 the country started the revision of its laws on 
vineyards and wines.  
On rural development, the amendments to the Inter-sectorial Strategy for the Agriculture and 
Rural Development known as "100 villages programme" provides support to agro-tourism 
businesses. Significant progress has been recorded on IPARD II programme with full budget 
implementation entrustment for three measures in October 2018. The call related to the 
measures (investments in agricultural holdings, processing, and diversification of agricultural 
activities) was launched at the end of November 2018 and finished on 30 January 2019. 188, 
65, and 64 applications have been received, respectively. One of the principal objectives for 
the national authorities will be to avoid de-commitment of IPARD II programme funding at 
the end of 2019. 
As regards quality policy, the law on quality schemes for agricultural products and foodstuffs 
was adopted in February 2019. It establishes quality schemes and responsible bodies for the 
recognition and protection of denominations of origin, geographical indications and 
traditional specialities guaranteed for agricultural products and foodstuffs.  
On organic farming, alignment with the EU acquis remains low. The Commission for 
Organic Production (COP) is responsible for approving and supervising the control bodies for 
the certification of organic products. The Sector for Policies of Agricultural and Livestock 
Production provides certification, is responsible for developing legislation, registering organic 
operators and operating the database containing information on organic production. During 
2018, support to organic farming has included certified farms and farms transitioning to 
organic production. The number of beneficiaries and the amount of support under this scheme 
has increased.  
5.12.  Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy 
EU hygiene rules for foodstuff production ensure a high level of food safety. Animal health 
and welfare and the safety of food of animal origin are safeguarded together with quality of 
seeds, plant protection material, protection against harmful organisms and animal nutrition. 
Albania has some level of preparation in this area. Albania has made some progress in 
implementing relevant policies in the food safety and veterinary sectors. As regards 
recommendations from the 2018 report, Albania is still expected to advance alignment with 
the latest EU acquis on official controls, animal health and plant health. Restructuring of the 
veterinary sector shall also be completed, along with building the necessary technical and 


===== PAGE 69 =====
 
68 
 
administrative capacity in the field of food safety and phytosanitary services to cope with the 
requirements of the acquis. 
In the coming year, Albania should in particular:  
 maintain the vaccination programmes until rabies is eradicated;  
 upgrade the system of controls of residues and contaminants in live animals and animal 
products;  
 enforce food safety rules through improved official controls, including import conditions 
and controls. 
On general food safety, for the third consecutive year, the National Food Authority carried 
out official controls under a risk-based plan approved at the beginning of 2017. The standard 
operating procedures needed to ensure compliance with the legislation have not yet been 
endorsed, including those on internal audits. No progress has been made on risk assessment. 
The official controls have been intensified and relevant measures have been applied including 
warnings, fines, seizure and disposal of non-consumable food, and activity suspension. 
However, control staff is not adequately trained on the assessment and implementation of 
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP). The National Food Authority has 
promptly reacted upon notifications from the Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed 
(RASFF) taking the appropriate measures to control the problem. Conversely, Albania 
dutifully provided notifications to the system when warranted. 
As regards veterinary policy, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development has 
approved relevant disease control strategies for anthrax, brucellosis, bovine tuberculosis and 
lumpy skin disease in 2018. Programmes for the monitoring of brucellosis and tuberculosis in 
cattle have been implemented in herds having more than 10 heads.  Vaccination against rabies 
and anthrax has been carried out satisfactorily, while vaccination for brucellosis in small 
ruminants has faced reluctance from farmers to pay for the identification of animals. The 
vaccination programme for lumpy skin disease is ongoing and no new case was reported. The 
information on animal identification and registration system has been improved with regard to 
cattle but the system on small ruminants remains inaccurate.  
The reporting of slaughtered animals during 2018 has improved compared to 2017 but the 
number of reported animals remains much lower than the real amount.  
The government has started the re-organisation of the regional veterinary service in four main 
regions. The reform of veterinary service is not yet complete, with tasks and responsibilities 
not established on a clear chain of command and line of communication. The service remains 
understaffed, fragmented and unable to cover other issues related to veterinary policy, animal 
waste management, farm biosecurity or fishery products. Currently, there is no distinct 
veterinary service, but veterinary staff consisting of 3 people (out of 7 planned in the 
organigram) divided in two sectors under the Directorate of Deregulations, Permits, Licences 
and Monitoring. Programming related to veterinary services is covered by the sector of 
programmes on food safety and veterinary under the Directorate of Programming in 
Agriculture, Rural Development and Food Safety  
With regard to the placing on the market of food, feed and animal by-products, a 
regulation regarding the labelling of food and information to consumer has been approved. 
The annual programmes for monitoring residues of undesired substances covering veterinary 
medicines, bio-toxins and heavy metals have been updated and adjusted in line with technical 
and financial resources. The planning of the monitoring for pesticide residues in food released 


===== PAGE 70 =====
 
69 
 
on the market is not yet systematic. Deficiencies in the controls of residues and contaminants 
in live animals and animal products were noted. 
Concerning food safety rules, the preparation of secondary legislation has continued on the 
exemption of small food operators from applying HACCP, sampling and analysis of certain 
contaminants in food, implementation rules on planning of official controls, or monitoring of 
raw milk.    
Positive changes made during 2018 on microbiological monitoring of raw milk have further 
improved. A larger number of samples are now taken directly at the farm.  
Besides general rules included in the Food Law, no progress has been made on preparing the 
required legislation on specific rules for feed. 
On phytosanitary policy, following the 2016 Law on Plant Protection, pieces of secondary 
legislation regarding registration, procedures and criteria for assessing plant protection 
products and rules on trading, transport, keeping and storage of plant protection products have 
been approved, along with a number of Ministerial orders related to active substances in plant 
protection products. 
There was no progress on preparing legislation on genetically modified organisms, and no 
structure has been appointed for this role. 
5.13.  Chapter 13: Fisheries 
The common fisheries policy lays down rules on fisheries management, protects living 
resources of the sea and limits the environmental impact of fisheries. This includes setting 
catch quotas, managing fleet capacity, rules on markets and aquaculture and support for 
fisheries and coastal communities.  
Albania is still at an early stage of preparation. Albania made some progress towards 
updating the vessel register and landing statistics. Albania has yet to implement part of the 
2018 report’s recommendations including to ensure efficient and effective implementation of 
the fishery sector strategy, as well as to improve inspection and control capacity to fight 
illegal fishing.  
In the coming year, Albania should in particular:  
 take steps to ensure the appropriate management of fisheries resources; in particular, 
pursue further implementation of the recommendations and action plans of the General 
Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean (GFCM), notably on the emergency 
measures for small pelagic stocks in the Adriatic Sea, as well as the Regional Plan of 
Action for small-scale fisheries; 
 ensure reliable data collection and landing statistics, including from small fisheries, to 
better adjust the fishing fleet’s capacity to the available fishing resources;  
 reactivate the vessel monitoring system (VMS) and strengthen inspection and control to 
deter illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. 
Regarding the resource and fleet management, the vessel register is regularly updated. 
Pursuant to the regulatory framework regarding the defining of management measures for the 
sustainable exploitation of marine fishery resources, an ordinance on the harvesting of bivalve 
molluscs was approved in June 2018.  


===== PAGE 71 =====
 
70 
 
Inspection and control capacity has not improved. The Department for Fisheries Services 
and Aquaculture lacks sufficient and qualified staff to ensure a 24/7 service to fight illegal 
fishing in marine waters and inland waters.  
Fisheries statistics for vessels over 12 m is collected from logbooks delivered to inspectors. 
Albania has not recruited the monitors and observers foreseen by the law. However, by 2019, 
assisted by the AdriaMed Regional Project (Scientific Cooperation to Support Responsible 
Fisheries in the Adriatic Sea) of the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations 
(FAO) and the General Fisheries Commission for Mediterranean (GFCM), the fishery service 
will start collecting data on discards giving also a help in the protection of vulnerable species.   
The fisheries service has not been reorganised in line with the recommendations of the 
Albanian government’s sector strategy of 2016. Since March 2017, the vessel monitoring 
system (VMS) has not been functioning making it difficult for the fishery inspection service 
to detect violations. Albania still needs to update and upgrade the server and install the new 
Mobile Transceiver Unit (MTU). Consequently, inspections and controls were mostly been 
applied to small fisheries operating in coastal or inland waters.  
Following approval of the Law on Aquaculture in 2016, the licensing of new aquaculture 
farms will be allowed during 2019 when the plan of allocated zones for aquaculture is 
prepared and approved. A register of fish farms is updated regularly. 
Data collection and scientific advice on managing fish stocks is still supported by the 
AdriaMed Project. Legislations on the collection, management and use of data in the fisheries 
sector and support for scientific advice regarding the common fisheries policy still needs to be 
adopted. 
Albania needs to align its structural actions, market policy and any state aid measures 
within the scope of this chapter with the relevant acquis. 
As regards international agreements, Albania, as a contracting party, consistently 
participated in the activities of the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean 
(GFCM) and is implementing its recommendations, including on small pelagic stocks in the 
Adriatic Sea. In addition, Albania fulfilled the requirements in the recommendations of the 
International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas. 
On fisheries governance, Albania signed the Ministerial Declaration regarding the Regional 
Plan of Action for Small-Scale Fisheries in the Mediterranean and the Black Sea on 26 
September 2018. It is a signatory party of the Ministerial Declaration MedFish4Ever, 
implementing the actions agreed therein. 
5.14.  Chapter 14: Transport  
The EU has common rules for technical and safety standards, security, social standards, State 
aid and market liberalisation in road transport, railways, inland waterways, combined 
transport, aviation and maritime transport.  
Albania has some level of preparation in the area of transport policy, although only limited 
progress was achieved in the past year. The recommendations of last year have been partially 
addressed. Efforts to comply with the requirements under the first transitional phase of the 
European Common Aviation Area Agreement remain to be made. 
In the coming year, Albania should: 
 adopt and implement the revised national transport plan (ANTP3) and start developing a 
national strategy for intelligent transport systems; 


===== PAGE 72 =====
 
71 
 
 adopt legislation to implement the railway sector reform. 
On the general transport acquis, the national transport strategy and action plan for 2016-
2020 for all transport modes was adopted in November 2016. The strategy includes a 
sustainable transport plan, which aims to ensure a sustainable transport network and improve 
energy efficiency. In October 2017, an inter-institutional working group was set up for 
monitoring the implementation of the strategy. The first monitoring report was presented to 
the public in June 2018. The second review of the national transport plan (ANTP3) is 
expected to be adopted during the second quarter of 2019. Albania needs to make further 
efforts to align its transport policy with the public-service obligations and the acquis on 
public-service contracts. Albania signed the Transport Community Treaty in July 2017 at the 
Western Balkans 6 Summit in Trieste and ratified it in February 2018. 
Administrative capacity throughout the transport sector needs to be strengthened, particularly 
in rail transport. The new Railway Code was adopted in December 2016 and entered into 
force in January 2018. Independent bodies to investigate railway accidents and waterborne 
accidents have not yet been set up. Funding for maintaining road and railway infrastructure is 
insufficient, resulting in its continued deterioration. Further efforts are needed to support the 
rail maintenance plans for 2018-2022. 
Albania has made steady progress in aligning its national legislation on road transport with 
the acquis. The country’s legislation is aligned with the acquis on transport of dangerous 
goods, licensing for road hauliers and access to the road transport market. The General 
Directorate for Transport Services, tasked with implementing the Law on dangerous goods, 
has yet to adopt and apply rules and guidelines on training and sanctions. It has not yet 
strengthened its inspection capacity. Greater efforts are also needed to align Albania’s 
legislation on commercial-vehicle inspections, traffic-management systems, and road safety 
(including road-safety education and road-safety enforcement). Albania must continue its 
efforts to align with the transport safety acquis and develop its enforcement capacity. In 2017, 
Albania partially aligned its legislation on the qualification of road transport operators with 
the EU’s acquis. After the adoption of guidelines and certification for inspectors, road safety 
inspections (RSI) and road safety audits (RSA) are now obligatory. Pilot road-safety 
inspections and roads safety audits are now being implemented along the ‘core’ road network, 
and they should be extended to the entire network. Implementation of the legislation on 
roadside checks of commercial vehicles is at an initial phase. Albania also needs to improve 
the existing national system for continuous road-crash data collection, in line with 
recommendations given by technical assistance (Connecta TA). The legislation on intelligent 
transport systems (ITS) is partially aligned with the EU acquis. Albania should follow-up on 
the recommendations of the regional study of November 2018 on a ‘Strategic Framework’ for 
implementation of ITS in TEN-T networks in WB6 and continue with the preparation, 
adoption and implementation of the national strategy for ITS.  
The new Railway Code aims to regulate rail transport by separating train operations from 
infrastructure management, in line with the EU acquis. It only partially transposes the recast 
Directive on a single European railway area and EU safety and interoperability rules. As a 
result, the unbundling of train operations from infrastructure management has not yet been 
achieved. Implementing legislation is being prepared for the establishment of relevant 
structures and agencies, in particular the Railway Regulatory Authority. There are 2 private 
railway operators licensed for freight transport, but only 1 is operating. Further efforts are 
needed to draw up the strategic framework for implementing the ITS on the core rail network. 


===== PAGE 73 =====
 
72 
 
On maritime transport, further efforts are needed to follow up on the country’s membership 
application to the Paris Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control. Efforts to 
improve flag-state control of Albanian flagged vessels and port state control must be 
strengthened to reduce the detention rate of vessels under the Albanian flag. Further efforts 
are also needed to draw up a strategic framework to implement ITS on the core maritime 
network. Legislation on EU vessel-traffic monitoring and information systems has not been 
aligned yet.  
There were no new developments in inland waterway transport. This mode of transport is 
limited to two lakes shared with neighbouring countries and regulated by bilateral agreements.  
On aviation, Albania should be adequately prepared for the assessment visit requested under 
the European Common Aviation Area Agreement. This agreement, ensures proper 
transposition and implementation of the relevant EU acquis, notably in the areas of aviation 
safety, security and economic regulation. On air-traffic management, Albania has not yet 
complied with the ‘single European Sky’ requirements for the first transitional phase under 
the ‘European Common Aviation sky’ Area Agreement, as the functional use of airspace has 
not been implemented yet. Albania should also focus its efforts on the second transitional 
phase. 
Even though the national transport strategy includes some priority actions for the 
development of combined transport, there is still no legislation regulating combined 
transport. Albania should increase efforts to implement EU passenger rights legislation in all 
modes of transport. 
5.15.  Chapter 15: Energy 
EU energy policy covers energy supply, infrastructure, the internal energy market, 
consumers, renewable energy, energy efficiency, nuclear energy and nuclear safety and 
radiation protection. 
Albania is moderately prepared in this area. There was some progress in the gas sector and 
on interconnection lines. The new national energy strategy 2018-2030 has been adopted. 
However, the country has delayed electricity market reforms and should accelerate 
implementation of the connectivity reform measures, especially by removing legal and 
contractual obstacles to the integration of energy markets.  
In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
 diversify electricity production away from hydropower and promote alternative sources of 
renewable energy while complying with environmental standards, and establish an 
organised day-ahead electricity market;   
 finalise the unbundling of energy companies and abolish legal obstacles to the right of 
customers to change their electricity supplier;  
 fully align its Energy Efficiency Law with the acquis, set up an energy efficiency fund 
and draft and adopt secondary legislation implementing the Energy Performance of 
Buildings Directive. 
On security of supply, Albania is at a moderate stage of preparation. Albania’s oil-stock 
legislation is not in line with the acquis. There was no progress in creating a central 
stockholding body for oil. There is an inter-institutional working group for analysing and 
developing a plan for re-designing the emergency stockholding system. This working group 
has been working for several years on a model for an emergency oil-stock reserve and on a 
draft law on the minimum stocks of crude oil required for security of supply. Albania must 


===== PAGE 74 =====
 
73 
 
complete the alignment with the acquis on minimum oil stocks of crude oil and/or petroleum 
products. It must also amend its emergency oil-stock model. 
Albania’s electricity system has been interconnected with the neighbouring systems of Greece 
and Montenegro since 2014, when the European Network of Transmission System Operators 
(ENTSO-E) approved synchronous operation of the Albanian electricity transmission system 
with the continental European system. Electricity distribution losses in the Albanian power 
grid in 2018 were high at 24.4%, although they were lower than in 2017 when they stood at 
27.5%.  
On the internal energy market, Albania has adopted legislation on gas and electricity in line 
with the EU’s third energy package. In March 2017, the Albanian Energy Regulator Entity 
(ERE) approved the certification of OST SA as the transmission system operator, following a 
positive opinion from the Energy Community Secretariat. The ENTSO-E assembly therefore 
admitted OST SA as a full member of the network. However, ERE also imposed conditions 
on OST SA in the final certification decisions. These conditions concerned the transfer of 
investment tasks to the new public body owner of the TSO. These conditions have not yet 
been met, and the deadline for meeting them has been postponed for three years. 
Some progress has been achieved in the legal unbundling of the distribution-system operator 
OSHEE SA from its supply activity. This was achieved by the establishment of three new 
companies, but effective legal unbundling is pending due to delayed transfer of human 
resources to the new companies. Functional unbundling has been postponed by ERE decision 
till December 2020. In January 2018, the Energy Community Secretariat initiated an 
infringement procedure for non-compliance with Albania’s obligations on OSHEE’s 
unbundling. 
Electricity prices are still regulated but should be gradually liberalised once legislation is 
implemented. The freedom for all customers to switch suppliers is effectively prevented by 
amendments to the Power Sector Law; implementation is still lacking since most customers 
connected to 35kV are allowed to by supply of last resort, and all connected to lower voltage 
level – by universal service supplier. The electricity market remains closed by a regulated 
contract between state-owned generation and supply companies. This contract must be 
terminated urgently. 
ERE’s legal framework is to a prevailing extent in line with the acquis except for a few but 
central missing competences, namely the right to impose measures to promote competition, to 
require transmission and distribution system operators to change their terms and conditions 
and to raise the penalty level ERE is entitled to impose. On the practical side ERE should 
develop into a well-equipped and skilled independent institution that addresses shortcomings 
in the national energy markets more actively.  
The Vlora thermal power plant (built with financing from the European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development of EUR 40 million, EIB financing of EUR 40 million, and 
World Bank financing of EUR 20.5 million) has never been put into operation since its 
completion in 2011. This is due to a failure in the plant’s cooling system that has not been 
repaired. The conversion of the Vlora power plant from oil use to gas use once it is connected 
to the trans-Adriatic pipeline is encouraged. This would stabilise the generation of electricity 
during droughts in the southern part of Albania. 
On hydrocarbons, Albania has not aligned its legislation with the Hydrocarbons Licensing 
Directive, but there has been some progress with its secondary legislation. The Directive on 
safety of offshore oil and gas installations has not been transposed. In February 2018, the 
Albanian government adopted the ‘gas master plan’, which assesses investment needs until 


===== PAGE 75 =====
 
74 
 
2040. In May 2018, Albgaz SA, the combined gas operator in Albania, was admitted as an 
observer at the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Gas. Albgaz should 
continue with permanent capacity building to be prepared for operation of future gas 
infrastructure. 
The main interconnection line, the trans-Adriatic pipeline, is progressing on schedule.  (see 
Chapter 21 – Trans-European networks) 
The regulatory framework for renewable energy is at an early stage. The revised national 
renewable-energy action plan for 2018-2020 envisages that 38% of gross final energy 
consumption will come from renewable energy sources, in line with the commitments made 
to reach 38% renewable energy target in 2020. With the adoption of the Law promoting 
renewable energy in 2017, Albania increased its compliance with the acquis. This Law 
introduced schemes to support renewable-energy producers above 2 MW (for solar power) 
and 3 MW (for wind power) through a competitive procedure. The procedure is based on the 
support scheme ‘contracts for difference‘ to be paid on top of the market price of electricity. 
The Law incorporates a net metering scheme for photovoltaic (PV) or wind energy with a 
capacity of up to 500 kW. However, urgent efforts are needed to increase the share of 
renewable energy sources other than hydropower.  
Albania depends almost exclusively on hydropower for its electricity generation (98% of its 
electricity generation comes from hydropower), making it vulnerable to unfavourable 
hydrological conditions in the summer. In addition, electricity from hydropower is not 
sufficient to meet its needs. Albania is a net importer of electricity and ensuring the security 
of its power supply is a challenge. Several investments in renewable energy (local and 
foreign) have been made through concession contracts to build and operate hydroelectric 
power plants. However, around 20% of the more-than-500 concession contracts are located in 
protected areas, and some plants have had a significant impact on local biodiversity. Plans for 
future plants have generated debate and protests about the need to address ecological and 
water rights considerations.  
Doubts have been expressed about the quality of strategic environmental assessments (SEAs) 
and environmental impact assessments (EIAs) carried out on energy projects. Investments 
into hydropower should be compliant with relevant EU environmental acquis. Hydropower 
plants in protected areas and sensitive locations should pass all necessary legal procedures 
(i.e. they should be subject to public consultations (Aarhus Convention), respect the national 
legislation, and be subject to properly conducted EIAs and SEAs). 
The main target of the energy efficiency action plans for 2017-2020 is a cumulative saving of 
6.8% of the energy used in Albania by 2020. The Energy Efficiency Agency was set up in 
2016 to implement energy efficiency policies and measures, but it is not yet staffed and 
operational. The agency reports to the minister responsible for energy. A working group has 
been set up within the Ministry of Energy and Infrastructure to prepare the establishment of 
the energy efficiency fund. However, full compliance with the Energy Community acquis has 
still not been achieved so the Energy Community’s Ministerial Council adopted a decision 
stating that Albania was in breach of its obligations. Albania still needs to start amending the 
Energy Efficiency Law to align with the Energy Efficiency Directive (EED). Albania finally 
submitted the first annual report under the EED in March 2018 (after a nine-month delay). 
The second annual report due in June 2018 was finally submitted in March 2019. A law on 
energy performance in buildings entered into force in 2016. Albania still needs to adopt the 
necessary legislation to achieve full compliance with the acquis in this area. 
There has been moderate progress in nuclear energy, nuclear safety and radiation 
protection. Albania has no nuclear power plant on its territory, nor is it planning to build one. 


===== PAGE 76 =====
 
75 
 
There is a National Nuclear Agency whose mission is to put in place a system to calculate 
energy demand for the next 20-30 years. Albania has adopted some guidelines and orders on 
policy and strategic steps for safely managing radioactive waste. It has also ratified a number 
of international conventions. Albania is not a member of the European Community Urgent 
Radiological Information Exchange. It has partly aligned with the acquis on controlling radon 
and is preparing a national plan on the issue. The Radiation Protection Commission operates 
as Albania’s nuclear regulatory authority, with the Radiation Protection Office (with 10 
employees) as the executive body. 
5.16.  Chapter 16: Taxation 
EU rules on taxation cover value added tax and excise duties as well as aspects of corporate 
taxation. They also deal with cooperation between tax administrations, including the 
exchange of information to prevent tax evasion. 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of taxation. Some progress was made through 
strengthening the General Directorate of Taxation (GDT) and the establishment of the fiscal 
cadastre for buildings. Revenue performance in 2018 was above 2017 levels (+4.6%) but 
below target (-1.9%), largely due to underperformance of VAT and excises.  
In the coming year, the country should in particular: 
 simplify the taxation system, encouraging enhanced tax compliance; 
 ensure that by end 2019 it joins the Inclusive Framework of OECD BEPS (base erosion 
and profit shifting);  
 address systematically the recurrence of delays in VAT refunds and avoid large backlogs.  
Regarding indirect taxation, the standard value added tax (VAT) rate is 20%. However, 
there are an increasing number of exemptions and lower rates of 6% and 10%. 
Excise taxation is partially aligned with the EU acquis. Marking of mineral oils is done for 
some categories. Tobacco excise duties are set to increase in annual steps, from EUR 48 per 
1,000 cigarettes as of 1 January 2019 to EUR 52 from 1 January 2021. Favourable excise 
taxation of some groups of tobacco products of Albanian origin compared to imports persist, 
which is not in line with obligations of Albania under the SAA. Small producers of alcoholic 
beverages enjoy reduced tax rates. For personal consumption, amounts up to 100 litres for 
spirits and up to 200 litres for wine are tax exempted. The excise law taxes all energy 
products listed in Directive 2003/96/EC.  
Regarding direct taxation, financial institutions are legally required to calculate, withhold, 
and declare income tax on income from savings. Albania does not provide deferral of taxation 
as provided for in the Merger Directive. Albania has committed to join the OECD Inclusive 
Framework on anti-Base Erosion and Profit Shifting by 2019. 
On administrative cooperation and mutual assistance, Albania is yet to sign double 
taxation agreements with Denmark, Cyprus, Lithuania, Portugal, Slovakia and Finland. It has 
not yet established a central liaison office to automatically exchange financial account 
information based on the OECD single Global Standard.  
Concerning operational capacity and computerisation, the tax administration has 1,569 
posts, but the number of vacancies remained high at 206 in 2018. The annual training 
programme is needs-based and was approved by the Director-General of Taxation in January 
2019.  


===== PAGE 77 =====
 
76 
 
Albania does not yet have the technical capacity to facilitate the efficient exchange of 
information, nor does it have the appropriate infrastructure to apply EU IT standards. The 
electronic tax administration system continues to be operational since January 2015 but the IT 
department strategy must still adopt its plans to achieve interconnection and interoperability 
with EU systems. 
The legal basis for the fiscal cadastre was approved in 2018 and preparations for putting it in 
place started.  Delays in VAT refunds continue even though the bulk of the backlog concerns 
three large economic operators. As of January 2019 different thresholds to categorise 
economic operations apply for income and VAT, resulting in a more complicated system to 
administer and likely encouraging tax avoidance and evasion. 
5.17.  Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy 
EU rules require the independence of central banks and prohibit them from directly financing 
the public sector. Member States coordinate their economic policies and are subject to fiscal 
economic and financial surveillance. 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of economic and monetary policy. Some 
progress was made, in particular, in complying with the rules on debt reduction and budget 
preparation set out in the organic budget law of 2016 and through the adoption of the medium 
term development Strategy of the Central Bank 
As not all recommendations from the 2018 Report were implemented, in the coming year, 
Albania should take further measures to: 
 align with the EU acquis the legislation on the Bank of Albania (BoA’s) independence 
and its accountability to the Parliament; 
 improve the government’s policy coordination and consultation mechanism with 
non-governmental stakeholders when formulating sector policies and economic reforms. 
In the area of monetary policy, the primary objective of the central bank, as set out in the 
Law on the Bank of Albania is to achieve and maintain price stability. The BoA is financially 
independent and has sufficient instruments, competence and administrative capacity to 
function effectively and to conduct an efficient monetary policy. The Supervisory Board of 
Bank of Albania is operational after the replacement of the six members, whose mandates 
expired in December 2018. Monetary policy is conducted with a standard set of instruments 
and within a free-floating exchange rate regime. No progress was made on furthering the 
alignment of the 1997 Law on the Bank of Albania with the acquis as regards the personal 
independence of the supervisory council members, especially of the governor, and the BoA’s 
accountability to the Parliament. 
In the area of economic policy, further alignment with the Directive on Requirements for 
Budgetary Frameworks is needed. Albania has complied with fiscals since its adoption in 
2016. Excessive Deficit Procedure notification tables are sent regularly to Eurostat on a best-
effort basis, but they are not complete and not fully in line with the European System of 
National and Regional Accounts (ESA 2010) requirements. A government instruction on the 
procedures for preparation, presentation and reporting of annual financial statements in 
government units was adopted in March 2018, aiming at improving public sector accounting. 
With the reform of the public sector accounting system, measures have been identified to 
move to using the international public sector accounting standards.   
The Economic Reform Programme 2019-2021 was submitted on time. Albania needs to 
strengthen its administrative capacities, including adequate human resources, for designing 


===== PAGE 78 =====
 
77 
 
and coordinating the economic policy and for monitoring the implementation and impact of 
structural reforms and regulations in consultation with local stakeholders  
5.18.  Chapter 18: Statistics 
EU rules require that Member States are able to produce statistics based on professional 
independence, impartiality, reliability, transparency and confidentiality. Common rules are 
provided for the methodology, production and dissemination of statistical information. 
Albania is moderately prepared on statistics. Some progress was made in many statistical 
areas and by adopting the amended Law on Official Statistics. The role of the National 
Statistical System (INSTAT) was strengthened, however methods of data collection need to 
be modernised and statistical production processes should be improved. 
In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
 reinforce INSTAT’s resources by filling the vacant posts; 
 implement the amended Law on Official Statistics and expand the scope of official 
statistics in line with the EU acquis; 
 improve communication with users and other stakeholders. 
Regarding statistical infrastructure, the legal framework is in line with the European 
Statistics Code of Practice and classifications are in line with EU standards. The amended 
Law on Official Statistics came into force in May 2018, changing the legal status of INSTAT 
to that of an independent institution reporting directly to Parliament. It strengthened the role 
and functions of the national statistical system, improved coordination and changed the role 
and composition of the Statistical Council. However, the scope of official statistics should be 
redefined to include all European statistics and to improve access to the additional official 
statistics. The five-year programme on the official statistics for 2017-2021 should be adapted 
according to the new statistical law. 19 employees have been recruited in 2018, while 22 
vacancies are yet to be filled. INSTAT’s budget and staffing continued to be insufficient for 
fully implementing the EU acquis in the field of statistics. 
Additional memoranda of understanding were signed during 2018 with data custodians on 
access to statistics. According to the new law on official statistics, producers of statistics have 
a stronger mandate to access and use administrative data for statistical production purposes. 
This law prevails over any other provision that might be an obstacle for administrative data 
transmission for statistical purposes or to ensure statistical confidentiality. However, there is 
still a need for modernising methods of data collection and improving statistical production 
processes, setting targets for timeliness and measuring the response burden. 
On macroeconomic statistics, annual and quarterly GDP data is produced based on the 
production and expenditure approach, in current and constant prices. Supply and use tables 
and derived input-output tables are harmonised with the definitions of the European System of 
National and Regional Accounts (ESA 2010). Excessive deficit procedure notification tables 
are sent regularly to Eurostat on a best-effort basis, but they are not complete. Further 
improvements are needed in Government Finance Statistics. INSTAT produces and publishes 
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 
As regards structural business statistics, data collection and production have further 
improved. In 2018, INSTAT started transmitting to EUROSTAT short-term statistics 
indicators. Starting from the first quarter 2018, INSTAT regularly conducts quarterly surveys 
of Service Producer Price Index. INSTAT has good relationships with respondents, and 
achieves quite high response rates in both business and household surveys.  


===== PAGE 79 =====
 
78 
 
On social statistics INSTAT should further improve communication and consultation with 
users, including major stakeholders, including producers, the media, representative 
organisations, and the research community. Such groups would provide feedback on products 
and services, informing users about developments, plans, and information needs. The Labour 
Force Survey is conducted regularly and micro-data is provided to Eurostat. INSTAT does not 
produce Job Vacancy Statistics yet. Labour cost statistics are calculated on the basis of a 
Labour Cost Survey, which is conducted every four years (last in 2017). The data and the 
quality report are transmitted in timely manner to Eurostat. INSTAT conducted the full third 
wave of survey of Income and Living Conditions (SILC) in the period between April and July 
2018 and data is still not finalised.  
Statistics on external migration and asylum are partially aligned with EU legislation. Crime 
statistics are published quarterly. INSTAT has started the preparatory work regarding the 
2020 Population and Housing Census.  
Agricultural statistics are partially aligned with the EU acquis. It is essential to improve the 
quality of the data of the administrative registers, such as the farm register, individual register 
of animals and the animal holding registers, among others.  The Farm Structure Survey has 
not been finalised. The next census of agriculture holdings is planned for 2022. INSTAT 
should start the preparation of the strategic document for that census, including a 
corresponding action plan and the budget.  
Environmental and energy statistics are in line with the EU acquis to a very limited extent. 
INSTAT produces the Balance of Electricity twice per year and publishes the General 
Balance of Energy produced by the National Agency of Natural Resources. Short-term energy 
statistics are still produced as volume data for electricity only. Detailed data on urban waste 
statistics are in line with the EU acquis. Air emission accounts are partially in compliance 
with the EU requirements. Environmental-related taxes by economic activity were published 
on INSTAT’s website in July 2018 for the years 2010-2016, while the data for the year 2017 
are expected to be published in July 2019. 
5.19.  Chapter 19: Social policy and employment 
EU rules in the social field include minimum standards for labour law, equality, health and 
safety at work and non-discrimination. They also promote social dialogue at European level. 
Albania has some level of preparation on social policy and employment. Some progress 
was made on increasing labour market participation and on improving the quality and 
effectiveness of labour market institutions and services. Albania has continued to restructure 
its employment governance system, as stipulated in the new law on vocational education and 
training. The employment rate and labour market participation remain low, and the informal 
economy is still a significant job provider.  
In the coming year, the country should: 
 adopt necessary secondary legislation and restructure the employment and VET 
governance, upon the adoption  of the employment promotion law;  
 intensify efforts to implement the 2015-2020 social protection strategy, with a special 
focus on vulnerable groups, strengthening the capacity and resource of local government 
to assess social care needs in their territory; 
 establish clear representativeness criteria for membership in the National Labour Council 
and adopt them by law. 


===== PAGE 80 =====
 
79 
 
On labour law, the amended Labour Code is being implemented. Monitoring of the 
implementation of the Labour Code amendments still requires  strengthening of data 
collection and better instruments for processing disaggregated data. Labour inspectorate 
capacity and performance need to further be strengthened and the labour inspectorates should 
develop effective training of inspectors. Child labour remains a concern, with more effective 
measures needed to prevent it. There is also a need to strengthen the system of monitoring 
child labour. 
Regarding health and safety at work, the 2016-2020 occupational, safety and health policy 
document and its action plan are under implementation. Between 2013 and 2017, Albania 
adopted laws transposing 19 EU directives linked to the Framework Directive on Health and 
Safety at Work. In 2018, Albania concentrated on implementation, but low financial and 
human capacities are a limitation on the way towards an effective implementation of health 
and safety at work legislation. Reported accidents at work increased from 107 in 2016-2017 to 
222 in 2017-2018, and fatalities at work increased from 13 to 33 in the same timeframe. A 
total of 265 workers suffered accidents in 2017-2018, of which 153 in 2018. Most of the 
accidents (around 60%) occurred in the mining (23%), manufacturing (23%) and construction 
(15%) sectors. Statistical data on health and safety remains to be improved. 
Social dialogue remains weak in both the private and public sector. Regarding tripartite social 
dialogue, the mandate of the National Labour Council was renewed in April 2018. However, 
clear representativeness criteria are still under discussion and have not yet been set in law. 
Significant efforts are still needed to transform the National Labour Council into an effective 
social dialogue forum, aiming at improving collective bargaining. Intensification of bipartite 
social dialogue, in particular at local and company level is also needed across the country. At 
regional level, the decision on a tripartite Regional Consultative Council, consisting of 
representatives of employers’ organizations, trade unions and representatives of state 
structures, expected to be established by the second quarter of 2018, is still to be adopted. 
Also, the amicable labour disputes resolution system needs further consolidation.  
On employment policy, the administrative reform and the reduction in human capacities 
continues to affect the design, implementation and monitoring of employment policies and 
measures. While there has been improvement in the labour market, there are issues as regards 
alignment of education (including adult education) to the needs of the labour market. The 
employment and labour market participation rates continued to grow in 2018 and are high 
compared to the region. These figures however hide a high underemployment. At the 
beginning of 2018, job creation has been identified as 1 of 5 major cross-sectoral priorities of 
the current government. A mid-term review of the national employment and skills strategy 
(NESS) was completed. The revised action plan of the strategy will cover the period between 
2019 and 2022, and has still to be adopted during the first semester 2019. The secondary 
legislation implementing the Vocational Education and Training (VET) Law has been drafted 
but is yet to be adopted. No progress was made in extending employment and VET services to 
rural areas. The revised Albanian Qualification Framework Law was adopted in May 2018, 
but significant efforts should be made to operationalise it. The Law on employment 
promotion was adopted in March 2019. The National Agency for Employment and Skills is 
expected to be set up a by June 2019 and secondary legislation still needs to be adopted. Little 
progress was made in linking the reform of social assistance to the employment and skills 
development programmes available. (Ex)-beneficiaries of economic assistance received more 
activation support during 2018 through job mediation and attendance in vocational training 
courses. Attendance in the latter was newly supported through a specific employment 
promotion programme approved in 2018. Activation support to this category is still low and 
not well tailored to the particular needs of the target group. 


===== PAGE 81 =====
 
80 
 
Public employment services were strengthened and the image and outreach of Labour Offices 
have improved with the restructuring of 13 additional labour offices throughout the country, 
during 2018. Further efforts should be made to finalise the reorganisation of the remaining 
employment offices.  
In 2018, there were 74 686 unemployed jobseekers (52.4% women) registered in employment 
offices and 34,669 (51% women) found a job through labour offices (LOs). The number of 
vacancies announced in LOs reached 61 391 (over 30% more than the previous year), 
showing an increased dynamism in the offices.  
The unemployment rate remains high, particularly among women, young people, Roma and 
Egyptians, and people with disabilities. In 2018, the unemployment rate (15-64) fell to 12.8% 
(12.3% for women, LFS, INSTAT data 2018), 1.3 percentage points below the level for the 
same period in 2017. The official youth unemployment rate (15-29) is 23.1%. It decreased by 
2.8 percentage points as compared to 2017. Long-term unemployment remains a challenge to 
be addressed through more flexible and tailored policy interventions. During 2018, 1 580 
undeclared workers have were identified by the State Labour Inspectorate (out of which 
29.6% females) and 855 urgent measures imposed. There were 12 297 inspections carried out 
in 2018 showing that 26% of employees are declared as paid at the minimum wage. The 
Institute of Statistics has sufficient resources to contribute to policies with comprehensive and 
reliable data, but the wage gap methodology still needs to be aligned with Eurostat 
requirements. Special focus should be placed on urban/rural ratios in all labour-related 
statistics.  
There were no developments on use of the European Social Fund. 
On social inclusion and protection, the national strategy on social protection for 2015-2020 
is being implemented. Efforts should be increased up to ensure implementation and 
appropriate allocation of financial resources to support the already adopted Law on social care 
services, the Law on the rights and protection of the child, and the 2017-2020 national agenda 
for children’s rights. In 2018, Albania adopted the decision “on the functioning of social 
fund”. This decision stipulates that sources of funding for the social care services must be 
provided from the state budget, municipal budgets, donations and other sources. Still the 
social fund mechanism remains to become functional at local and central level. Social care 
services are currently undeveloped, underinvested and lacking in many areas. Local 
government units are expected to assess needs in their territory and to prepare social care 
plans, but they lack capacities and resources to deliver on this task. In January 2018, the new 
economic aid scheme began being implemented all over the country, after being piloted in 
three main regions: Tirana, Durres and Elbasan. There is a lack of analysis on whether one of 
the objectives of the reform, i.e. an improved targeting of those most in need, is being 
achieved. The Ministry of Health and Social Protection should analyse this based on existing 
administrative data and where necessary to collect additional data. Some progress has been 
achieved by using the management information system for disabled beneficiaries, which is 
still in the pilot phase. However, there is a need to increase the efforts in the creation of social 
and reintegration services for people with disabilities. The process of transitioning from 
residential institutional care to community-based care for vulnerable groups is being piloted in 
Durres, Shkoder and Saranda. This process has now been extended to all nine public 
residential institutions for children under 18. Foster care and other forms of alternative care 
are promoted by the state social services. However, these care services require further 
financial support and the adequate allocation of human resources from the state.   
As regards the cross-sectoral document on social inclusion policy for 2016-2020, little 
progress has been made in setting up the necessary structures at central level or clarifying 


===== PAGE 82 =====
 
81 
 
arrangements for implementing the policy. The government should increase its efforts to 
ensure there is a comprehensive plan for building the capacity of all line ministries and local 
governments to implement the actions outlined in the document. Poverty data produced by the 
EU – SILC (statistics on income and living conditions) are not yet published. To address 
many of Albania’s shortcomings identified by international bodies in the field of housing and 
forced eviction, the Council of Ministers approved a fully-fledged Social Housing Law in 
2018. However, there are financial gaps to ensure proper implementation of the law.  
On non-discrimination in employment and social policy, legislative amendments have been 
adopted on the employment and workplace environment for women, defining and reversing 
the burden of proof in cases of sexual harassment. 
As regards equality between women and men in employment and social policy, according 
to INSTAT data the gender gap in employment stood at 14.3 percentage points and did not 
show any sign of improvement over the recent years. The 2018 World Economic Forum’s 
gender gap index report showed Albania improved compared to its 2017 (rising from 38 to 34 
out of 149 countries). However, the country does not have enough kindergarten and early 
childhood education and care facilities to enable parents, especially women, to work. The 
changes to the Labour Code introduced more measures to support work-life balance for 
working parents but there is no monitoring of the implementation of these changes. According 
to INSTAT the 2018 report, 42% of women in the labour force are employed in paid positions 
while 23.0% of them engage in unpaid work in the family business. For employed men, these 
figures are 37.0% and 12.0% respectively. 36% of men in the labour force are self-employed, 
compared to 23.0% of women. In rural areas, in 2016 women were more likely to be 
contributing family members than men. In the third quarter of 2017, agriculture employed 
35% of employed males and 42% of employed females. Concerns remain over the proportion 
of women in the informal labour market, especially the textile and shoe industries, without 
appropriate labour and social protection. There are also concerns over the lack of 
disaggregated data on the number of working women in the informal economy. 
5.20.  Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy 
EU industrial policy strengthens competitiveness, facilitates structural change and 
encourages a business-friendly environment that stimulates small and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs). 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of enterprise and industrial policy. Some 
progress was made by introducing incentives to stimulate investment in the tourism sector 
and implementing an innovation support program.  
In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
 effectively implement  the triple-helix action plan; 
 accelerate the full alignment of its legislation with the Late Payment Directive; 
 address the main challenges to the business environment, notably reducing regulatory 
burden more vigorously. 
The 2014-2020 business and investment development strategy sets the strategic framework 
for Albania’s enterprise and industrial policy. Albania continues implementing the South-
East Europe 2020 regional initiative. The business and investment development strategy 
covering business development, including SMEs and increased skills, developing innovation, 
promoting sustainable growth, and creating the conditions for attracting foreign investment, 
needs to be revised to reflect future country priorities beyond 2020. The implementation of 


===== PAGE 83 =====
 
82 
 
the action plan based on a ‘triple helix’ model that incorporates measures requiring the 
involvement of the public and private sectors together with universities is behind schedule. 
The national Strategy on Innovation and Technology adopted in 2017 still needs to be 
implemented. A donor-funded innovation programme has started in February 2019, aiming to 
support innovation and start-ups with EUR 7.5 million budget. 
Albania follows the implementation of the Small Business Act. Despite some improvement in 
the business environment, SMEs continue to identify their main challenges as: the informal 
economy (notably in the tourism sector), lack of transparency in public procurement 
especially related to Public Private Partnerships (PPPs), need for stable state institutions, 
unclear ownership of property titles, and issues regarding the enforcement of the rule of law. 
Concerning the combating of informal economy, measures to expand the taxpayer bases 
implemented in 2018 and to enforce implementation, contribute to creating a level-playing 
field for economic operators. Privatisation of State assets continued during 2018, partly 
through privatisation vouchers. A Law on the Establishment and Operation of Economic 
Zones exists but no development can be reported regarding their establishment. A technology 
industrial park, not subject to the law, is under development since July 2017 in Rushbull, 
Durres. 
In the area of enterprise and industry policy instruments, the Albanian Investment 
Development Agency offers funding instruments to stimulate entrepreneurship in tourism, 
handicrafts and innovation and to support toll manufacturing under inward processing regime 
and competitiveness. However, the implementation is not proceeding successfully or is 
limited. Access to finance remains a serious challenge for businesses. Albanian legislation is 
partially aligned with the 2011 Late Payment Directive and full alignment should be 
accelerated. Albania has partly aligned its definition of SMEs with the EU Recommendation. 
Albania participates in the EU’s COSME programme for SMEs and the Enterprise Europe 
Network through a consortium led by the Investment Development Agency. The second 
European Enterprise Network (EEN) project was completed by the end of 2018 and in 2019 
the same consortium started the third EEN project. 53 companies have registered their profiles 
in the European Enterprise Network database and only five partnership agreements have been 
signed. Level of absorption of information and participation under COSME financial 
instrument remains low and no contract has been signed yet.  
Regarding sector policies, a fiscal incentive package was adopted in 2018 for 4-5 star hotels 
and will remain in place in 2019. Incentives were introduced to the agro-processing industry. 
A strategic policy paper for non-food industry and a strategy on tourism and its action plan, 
remain in the drafting phase and are expected to be adopted in 2019. The adoption of the 
Tourism Strategy faces delays. 
5.21.  Chapter 21: Trans-European networks 
The EU promotes trans-European networks (TEN) in the areas of transport, 
telecommunications and energy to strengthen the internal market and contribute to growth 
and employment. 
Albania has some level of preparation in the area of trans-European networks. Some 
progress was made in developing transport and energy networks. Some progress was made 
on its gas interconnection with the implementation of the trans-Adriatic pipeline project. 
In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 


===== PAGE 84 =====
 
83 
 
 continue development of the core transport and energy networks in line with: (i) the 
national strategies for transport and energy; (ii) the infrastructure investment prioritisation 
under the single project pipeline; and (iii) the connectivity agenda; 
 harmonise the legal framework with the EU acquis and the regulations on TEN-T (trans-
European transport networks) and TEN-E (trans-European energy networks), including 
transposition of Regulation (EU) 347/2013 on guidelines for trans-European energy 
infrastructure; 
 implement connectivity reform measures and strengthen the institutional framework and 
administrative capacity to develop and monitor TENs. 
Albania is making progress in setting up the country’s strategic framework for transport 
networks. Albania intends to harmonise its legal and institutional framework with the EU 
TEN-T Regulation and the Transport Community Treaty, which it signed in June 2017 and 
ratified in February 2018. Albania participates actively in the South-east Europe Transport 
Observatory (which was replaced by the Transport Community Treaty in January 2019) and 
Western Balkans 6 (WB6) processes, focusing on improving connectivity within the WB6 and 
with the EU. The national transport strategy and action plan for 2016-2020 envisages an 
extension of the TEN-T Comprehensive and Core Networks to Albania and an alignment with 
TEN-T guidelines and EU standards and regulations. There was progress in drafting the 
second review of the Albanian national transport plan (ANTP3), which was completed in 
January 2019. It is expected to be adopted in the second quarter of 2019. 
Albania has made progress in repairing its road infrastructure in the core network. Albania is 
progressing with the preparation of road and rail infrastructure projects, especially along the 
Adriatic-Ionian corridor and corridor VIII. Upgrading of the railway from Durres to Tirana is 
planned to start by mid of 2019. Albania needs to ensure that its transport network projects are 
implemented in line with the TEN-T regulatory framework. Future infrastructure investments 
need to be implemented in compliance with EU standards on public procurement, state aid, 
and EIAs. Projects should be channelled through a single project pipeline, confirming the 
country’s strategic orientation towards TENs. Further efforts are needed on road safety. More 
serious measures should be taken to fix ‘blackspots’ along sections of roads with high 
accident rates. Adoption of the multiannual maintenance plans for the entire core network 
(rail and road) remains a challenge. 
Albania is partially aligned with the acquis on a single European railway area, railway system 
interoperability and rail freight corridors for competitive freight. Further efforts are needed to 
(i) align the country with the Directive on intelligent transport systems, (ii) develop the 
national strategy for intelligent transport systems (ITS); and (iii) prepare for implementation 
of that strategy.  
On energy networks, the national energy strategy 2018-2030 was adopted in 2018. The gas 
master plan was adopted by the government in February 2018. Further efforts need to be 
made to adopt the SEA and project identification plan related to the gas master plan. Adoption 
of this SEA and plan will help the development of TEN-E projects. Progress was made on 
improving the infrastructure for power transmission. The trans-Adriatic pipeline is 
progressing on schedule, with 84.1% of the project completed by the end of 2018. The 
pipeline is expected to be operational in 2020. Major gas interconnector projects are provided 
for under the gas master plan.  
However, Albania failed to transpose and implement the Regulation (EU) 347/2013 on 
guidelines for trans-European energy infrastructure by 1 January 2017, and in November 2018 


===== PAGE 85 =====
 
84 
 
the Ministerial Council of the Energy Community adopted a decision establishing a breach of 
Albania’s obligations under the Energy Community Treaty. 
Albania has functional power interconnection lines with Greece and Montenegro. It also has a 
technically functional power interconnection line with Kosovo. The 400 kV interconnection 
line between Albania and Kosovo was completed in June 2016, but it has not been possible to 
use it so far. The inability to use this interconnection is a huge financial drain for Albania and 
Kosovo. OST SA and KOST SA, the Albanian and Kosovo transmission system operators, 
have officially requested the assistance of the Energy Community Secretariat and the 
European Commission to start the operation of the line. 
The construction of the 400 kV line between Elbasan in Albania and Bitola in North 
Macedonia was approved in June 2016 by the government. The tendering procedure for 
project preparation and implementation was launched in April 2018. This procedure is still 
ongoing. The line is projected to cost EUR 70 million. The project is scheduled for 
completion in 2021. 
Albania also participates in the EU’s macro-regional strategy for the Adriatic and Ionian 
region (EUSAIR), for which the improvement of connectivity (transport and energy 
networks) is a main priority. 
5.22.  Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments 
Regional policy is the EU’s main tool for investing in sustainable and inclusive economic 
growth. Member States bear responsibility for its implementation, which requires adequate 
administrative capacity and sound financial management of project design and execution. 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of regional policy and coordination of structural 
instruments. Limited progress was made, in particular with the signature of the Financing 
Agreement for the 2017 IPA national programme and the completion of the IPA 2018 
programme.  
In the coming year, the country should in particular:  
 strengthen its administrative capacity, especially the Central Finance and Contracting Unit 
(CFCU) of the Ministry of Finance and Economy, the National Authorising Officer’s 
Support Office and the Audit Authority as well as the Ministry for Europe and Foreign 
Affairs; 
 accelerate the preparation of project documentation to avoid delays in the use of EU funds 
and difficulties in meeting contracting deadlines, as observed in the 2013, 2014, 2015 and 
2016 programmes; 
 increase programming capacity in line with the sectoral approach and sectoral policies, 
and improve the design of mature sector project pipelines. 
On the legislative framework, the national strategy for development and integration and 
several sectoral reform strategies have been adopted and are being implemented. A national 
medium-term budget plan has been drafted. Adequate co-financing capacity for EU 
programmes at national and local level has yet to be established. 
Regarding the institutional framework, the sector coordination and monitoring mechanisms 
with integrated policy management groups and sector steering committees have been formally 
reconfirmed by Order of the Prime Minister. The government’s Strategic Planning Committee 
has been reactivated. Further efforts are needed to make the structures operational. 
Coordination on EU integration and EU assistance needs to be ensured between national 


===== PAGE 86 =====
 
85 
 
administrations such as the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Finance 
and Economy, the Prime Minister’s Office and line ministries. 
On administrative capacity, the staff of the Audit Authority (including new recruits) has 
received further training. Further capacity-building measures are in the process of being 
undertaken for the CFCU, notably in order to speed up the public procurement process, and 
for the management structure. A proper retention strategy needs to be developed for all 
indirect management structures. The administrative capacity for sector reform coordination 
and monitoring through the integrated policy management groups and sector steering 
committees need to be improved. Staffing of the relevant secretariats needs to be confirmed. 
The involvement of development partners, local governments and civil society organisations 
in sectoral dialogue should be improved. 
Further efforts are still needed to upgrade the administrative capacity for multiannual sector 
programming in line with the sectoral approach under the IPA framework for 2014-2020. 
Albanian authorities provided input to the revised indicative strategy paper for IPA. The 
national project pipeline of investments, including those for regional development, is not yet 
fully aligned with the medium-term budget programme and the planning and management of 
nationwide public investment. 
On monitoring and evaluation, there is some progress toward formally setting up the Sector 
Monitoring Committees (for IPA II). These committees ensure the proper monitoring of EU 
pre-accession assistance and should meet regularly. The legal basis for these committees was 
laid down via a decision of the Prime Minister adopted in October 2018. The process for 
establishing the Sector Monitoring Committees should now be swiftly finalised. 
On financial management, control and audit, the Audit Authority has started demonstrating 
its ability to produce valuable findings, which need to be followed up by indirect management 
bodies. The Audit Authority is in the process of improving its contradictory procedure. The 
self-assessment of the National Authorising Officer’s Support Office on management and 
control systems needs to be improved. 
Regarding regional policy, the key implementing agencies are the Regional Development 
Agencies (RDAs), the Agency for Regional Economic Development (ARED), the Albanian 
Development Fund (ADF), and the National Agency for Regional Development (NARD). A 
decision of the Council of Ministers of July 2018 has transferred the functions of NARD, 
ARED, and RDAs to the ADF. The latter is expected to be the only implementing agency for 
regional development, at national and regional level. It is also expected to take overall 
responsibilities and fulfil functions of managing authority for regional development. The 
decision has however not yet been implemented.  
A draft law on regional development and cohesion policy has been designed by Albanian 
authorities after consultation with relevant public institutions and non-governmental 
stakeholders. Although announced to be adopted by the Parliament in July 2018, the draft law 
has still not been submitted for adoption. 
5.25.  Chapter 25: Science and research 
The EU provides significant support for research and innovation. All Member States can 
benefit from the EU’s research programmes, especially where there is scientific excellence 
and solid investment in research. 
Albania is at an early stage in the area of science and research. Some progress was made 
over the reporting period, especially with the implementation of the national strategy for 
scientific research, technology and innovation for 2017-2022 and the launching of the 


===== PAGE 87 =====
 
86 
 
mapping phase of the Smart Specialisation Strategy. However, last year recommendations 
have not been fully addressed. 
In the coming year, the country should in particular: 
 increase investment in research, in line with its own commitments and European research 
area priorities; 
 adopt the smart specialisation strategy; 
 ensure higher participation in Horizon 2020.  
On research and innovation policy, the 2017-2022 national strategy for scientific research, 
technology and innovation is being implemented. A decision on the methodology for 
assessing research activity in higher education institutions  was adopted in March 2018. Some 
progress was made on the creation of the national research database, which will be managed 
by the National Agency of Scientific Research and Innovation (NASRI). Now that the 
Albanian National Research and Education Network is connected to GEANT, national efforts 
should be made in the fields of open access and open data. 
In January 2017, the government approved the 2017-2021 action plan to support the 
development of innovative policies. This action plan aims to promote better links between 
academia, industry and government, but no progress was made on implementing the plan in 
2018. A new draft on law scientific research in the Republic of Albania has been finalised. It 
is scheduled to be presented in the Parliament in 2019 together with the new draft law on the 
Academy of Science.  
In response to students requests, in December 2018 the Council of Ministers approved some 
decisions on reductions in fees, monitoring of the performance of lecturers, transparency in 
the financial administration of universities, access to online virtual libraries, digital archives 
of lecturers’ publications and representation issues.    
Investments in research and other measures to strengthen research and innovation capacity at 
national level need to be stepped up. Albania does not currently have neither a clear 
methodology to establish clear funding for research and science, nor does it have a national 
roadmap for research infrastructure. Despite the fact that the aim to increase investments for 
Scientific Research, Technology and Innovation up to 1% of GDP by 2022 is written down in 
the strategy, the share of public spending for scientific research in 2018 only reaches 0.06% of 
GDP. Albania has no national roadmap for research infrastructure, whose mapping is 
expected to be completed by July 2019. In September 2017, the development of a smart 
specialisation strategy (S3) started under the lead of the Ministry of Education, Sports and 
Youth, in cooperation with the European Commission. However, the strategy still needs to be 
adopted. A road map for the S3 process has been drafted and the mapping process is being 
prepared with a TAIEX support. The mapping phase of the strategy is expected to be 
completed during 2019.  As regards EU framework programmes, Albania participates in 
Horizon 2020 as an associated country. Albania is by far the least successful performer of all 
countries associated to Horizon 2020, with a success rate of 7.8% overall so far (compared to 
the average success rate of 15.3%) despite a high application rate. Private sector participation 
in the programme remains particularly low.   
On integration into the European research area, Albania should be more active in all six 
priority areas of the European research area, and should improve its networking with 
European partners to engage in international cooperative research.  
On Innovation Union, the government adopted decisions to set up four programmes 
managed by the Albanian Investment Development Agency for 2018: the Creative Economy 


===== PAGE 88 =====
 
87 
 
Fund, the Start-up Fund, the Competitiveness Fund and the Innovation Fund. The objective 
should be to participate in the European Innovation Scoreboard. 
5.26.  Chapter 26: Education and culture 
The EU supports cooperation in education and culture through funding programmes and the 
coordination of Member State policy through the open method of coordination. The EU and 
the Member States must also prevent discrimination and ensure quality education for children 
of migrant workers, including those from disadvantaged backgrounds. 
Albania is moderately prepared in the field of education and culture. Some progress was 
made in this area, especially by improving the online application for recognition of diplomas, 
the curricular framework for pre-school education and standards of development and learning 
for children aged 3 to 6 years, and monitoring the framework for assessment of pre-school 
education. Some progress was also registered overall in the education and training system 
with the adoption of the revised Albanian Qualification Framework Law in May 2018. No 
progress was achieved in adopting the secondary legislation of VET Law and the strategy on 
culture for 2019-2023.                                                                                                                                           
In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
 implement the pre-university education strategy and the higher education reform, with a 
focus on ensuring inclusive and quality education at all levels both in urban and rural 
areas; 
 finalise the secondary legislation for the implementation of VET Law;  
 adopt and implement the national strategy on culture for 2019-2023 to preserve Albania’s 
cultural heritage. 
On education and training, where the level of public expenditure remains at 3.1% of GDP, 
progress was made with the implementation of curricular and legislative frameworks. For the 
implementation of the new curricula for early childhood education, around 1,300 teachers and 
kindergarten directors were trained. The level of enrolment in early childhood education was 
80.3% in 2018.  Adult (25-64) participation in formal or non-formal education and training is 
extremely low (in 2017 - 0.9% - according to the labour force survey’s methodology, and 
9.2% - according to the adult education survey’s methodology) compared to the EU average 
(10.9% in 2017, respectively 45.1% in 2016, using the same methodologies).  
Although their enrolment rates remain very low overall, the participation of Roma and 
Egyptians in early childhood education increased by 5% in elementary schools, by 25% in 
middle school, 27% in high school and in pre university education by 22%. Nevertheless, the 
gap in access to education between Roma/Egyptian children and non-Roma children living in 
the same areas remains very large. The measures planned to facilitate access to universities, 
quota system and university fee waiver, are in general not implemented.  
Following the curricular reform for grades 1 to 9, teachers received basic training before the 
introduction of a new curriculum for each grade. However, the new curricula require skills 
current teachers did not learn at university and further training, adequate mentoring and 
ongoing support are missing. Such support should be set up to ensure an effective 
implementation of the curricular reform. The review of the content and structure of curricula 
for initial teacher training in higher education institutions has started, and their introduction is 
expected in the academic year 2019-2020. 
Due to resource and capacity limitations quality in education is an issue across the country. 
Schools in rural, mountainous and isolated areas face additional problems, one of which is 


===== PAGE 89 =====
 
88 
 
that they cannot attract qualified teachers. In general, the education budget should be 
increased and its use should be more transparent, including for private higher-education 
institutions. 
The secondary legislation of the new VET Law of February 2017 has not yet been adopted. 
Qualification standards and framework curricula for most VET programmes are being 
modernised, even though some Albanian schools lack the teaching skills and equipment to put 
them into practice. Participation in VET is increasing, mainly through promotion of the VET 
services. The government plans to expand the responsibilities of the National Agency for 
VET and Qualifications to include VET teacher training and non-formal training. Albania 
should also make progress in ensuring that VET is inclusive. It can achieve this through 
targeted measures for rural women, people with disabilities, Roma and Egyptian minorities, 
and other populations at risk of exclusion, especially in rural and remote areas.   
A strategy on education (including higher education) for the coming years is still to be 
prepared by the authorities.  
The creation of the Teachers for Albania internet portal was one of the major areas of reform 
in 2018. The portal offers an online platform, where people who wish to become school 
teachers and pre-school teachers can register their interest and be selected, ensuring 
transparency in recruitment.  
Albania now offers the service of application for diploma recognition (since January 2017) 
and has reduced the number of requested documents for recognition. The country continues to 
participate actively in EU programmes, notably the Erasmus+ programme, through which 
there have been a total of 3 500 mobilities of staff and students from Albania since 2015 and 
23 Capacity Building projects in the field of Higher Education involving local beneficiaries 
are currently being implemented.   
Albania participated in the OECD Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 
2018, with results due to be published in December 2019. Despite constant improvements 
over the last three testing rounds (2009, 2012 and 2015), Albania continues to perform poorly 
in PISA tests. Half (50.3%) of the 15-year olds perform poorly in reading and even more 
(53.3%) perform poorly in mathematics.  Preparations are ongoing for Albania’s participation 
in PISA 2021. The country will also participate in the Trends in International Mathematics 
and Science Study (TIMMS) 2019 and Progress in International Reading Literacy Study 
(PIRLS) 2021 international assessments.  
On the culture sector, the national strategy for culture for 2019-2023 is expected to be 
adopted in May 2019.  The Law on cultural heritage and museums was adopted in May 2018. 
The aim of the Law is to preserve, protect, evaluate and administer Albania’s national cultural 
heritage, including museums. In addition, the Law sets up rules on the international 
movement of cultural assets, partially aligned with the EU acquis. 
Albania adopted the Law on the Protection of National Minorities in October 2017, in line 
with the 2005 UNESCO Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of 
Cultural Expressions.  The secondary legislation for the implementation of the Law are still to 
be adopted. A draft-decision ‘On determining the strategies, programmes and action plans to 
create the necessary conditions for national minorities to preserve and develop their distinct 
identity in the Republic of Albania’ is under preparation by the Ministry of Culture. It will be 
implemented jointly with the Ministry of Education, Sports and Youth. Albania has continued 
to participate in the EU Creative Europe programme with good results over the years. Since 
January 2018, the Ministry of Culture is in charge of managing the ‘Europe for citizens 


===== PAGE 90 =====
 
89 
 
programme’. In 2017, Albania benefited of nine projects under this programme, and last year 
the Ministry organised two information sessions about the programme.  
The Ministry of Education, Sports and Youth is preparing a draft law on youth. This law is 
expected to enhance the role of youth organizations in decision-making and ensure the 
efficiency of state institutions working on issues related to young people. During 2018, three 
youth centres have been established in the cities of Lac, Lushnja and Elbasan but further steps 
need to be taken to establish the remaining youth centres. Regional Youth Centres will 
provide information to young people in the mentioned cities. In the Capacity Building Youth 
action of the Erasmus+ Programme, the interest from Albanian organisations in the 2018 call 
was high: 26% of the total submitted applications came from Albanian organisations out of 
which 7 Albanian projects coordinated by Albanian organisations were selected. The 
Regional Youth Cooperation Office’s (RYCO) has its headquarters in Tirana and the country 
participated actively in their first call for projects.  
Albania has developed and implemented a programme called ‘Sexuality education for life 
skills’ for 10 to 18-year-old students. Since 2015, about 3,000 public schools teachers have 
been trained to teach this programme. The programme seeks to go  beyond improving sexual 
health. It also aims to prevent and reduce gender-based and intimate partner violence and 
discrimination; to increase gender equitable norms, self-efficacy and confidence; and to build 
stronger and healthier relationships. Albania participated for the first time in the European 
Week of Sports by organising as large number of sport activities in the country.    
5.27.  Chapter 27: Environment and climate change 
The EU promotes strong climate action, sustainable development and protection of the 
environment. EU law contains provisions addressing climate change, water and air quality, 
waste management, nature protection, industrial pollution, chemicals, noise and civil 
protection. 
Albania shows some level of preparation in this area. Limited progress was made in further 
aligning the policies and legislation with the acquis, in areas such as water management. 
However, significant efforts are needed on implementation and enforcement, especially in the 
water sector and on climate change.  
In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
 align with key water directives and accelerate the capacity development of the national 
agencies for Water Resource Management and for Water Supply, Sewerage and Waste 
Infrastructure; 
 take immediate measures to review and improve environmental and strategic impact 
assessments on existing and planned projects, plans and programmes, especially in the 
hydropower, construction, tourism, and mining sectors; 
 start implementing the Paris Agreement by adopting a national strategy and legislation on 
climate change, and by starting to develop integrated National Energy and Climate Plans 
in line with Energy Community obligation. 
Environment 
As regards horizontal issues, further progress is needed to achieve full alignment and 
implementation. The implementation of the Environmental Impact Assessment Directive 
(EIA) needs to be strengthened, especially in the hydropower and mining sectors. Permits for 
the construction of several new hydropower plants and tourist resorts in protected areas have 
been issued, with concerns pertaining to the quality of EIAs and public participation. Albania 


===== PAGE 91 =====
 
90 
 
has aligned to some extent with the Directive on establishing an infrastructure for spatial 
information (INSPIRE). More effort is needed to achieve effective public participation and 
consultation in the decision-making process, particularly at the local level. Further progress is 
needed to achieve full compliance with the remaining cross-cutting aspects of the directives 
on environmental liability, environmental crime and environmental inspection. The lack of a 
secondary legal framework is hampering the establishment of an adequate process and 
assessment of environmental liability for damage to the environment. Staff replacement has 
weakened the competences of inspectorates to carry out their functions. Further alignment 
with the directive on environmental crime still needs to be done. 
More efforts are needed to further align the legislation on air quality with the acquis. The 
national strategy for air quality has not been adopted. Despite full alignment with the directive 
on ambient air quality and cleaner air for Europe, the law on ambient air quality needs to be 
properly enforced and the current air quality monitoring network and practices to be aligned 
with EU standards. The environment agency should conduct regular monitoring of industries 
and installations which potentially emit large quantities of pollutants in the air. Further effort 
is needed to reduce the sulphur content of certain liquid fuels.  
The legal framework for waste management is partially aligned. The draft National Strategy 
for Integrated Waste Management is in the consultation phase. Further efforts are needed to 
close the over 199 non-compliant landfills and dumpsites, and to start implementing separate 
collection of waste streams, increase recycling and reuse, and start composting bio-waste. 
Only 65% of waste is collected and there is no recycling of demolition waste. Economic 
instruments to promote recycling and prevent waste generation remain limited. The 
construction of an incinerator in Elbasan and the starting of procedures for the construction of 
two more incinerators in Tirana and Fier pose concerns in terms of compliance with EU 
Directives on Waste, the waste hierarchy principle with incineration as the least preferred 
waste management option, and with the EU targets for recycling.  
On water quality, the level of alignment remains unchanged and partial, with important 
directives still not aligned. The National Agency for Water Supply, Sewerage and Waste 
Infrastructure has been given additional competences, but has to increase its capacity. 
Municipal utilities have to increase performance and sustainability. The existing waste water 
treatment plants face operation and maintenance issues. There is a strong need to extend the 
sewage networks and build new treatment plants, notably in urban, coastal and touristic areas. 
The integrated water resource management strategy has been adopted, and a new agency for 
water resource management has been created which has to rapidly build its capacities 
especially for river basin management. River basin management plans elaborated should be 
adopted promptly. The number of water quality monitoring points slightly increased, but the 
monitoring and reporting system has to develop further. The National Environment Agency 
should be urgently strengthened for this purpose.  
Alignment with the acquis in the field of nature protection, in particular the Habitats and 
Birds Directives, is well advanced. The law on protected areas was amended in 2018 to 
emphasise the planning and development of protected areas. The 2016 Strategic Investment 
law raises concerns for the protection of biodiversity, as it can allow large tourism and 
industrial investments in protected areas, namely in the Divjaka-Karavasta National Park and 
in the Vjosa-Narta Protected Landscape, in contradiction with existing national laws and 
international conventions on biodiversity protection that Albania has ratified. Capacities and 
financial instruments for National Protected Areas Agency remain very limited, with the law 
forbidding its financial autonomy. 


===== PAGE 92 =====
 
91 
 
Enforcement of the laws needs to be guaranteed in case of deforestation and logging, and 
culprits need to be prosecuted. Investments in hydropower need to comply with national and 
international nature protection and water management obligations, ensure public participation 
and consultation, and guarantee high quality EIA reports that include impact assessments on 
nature and biodiversity. 
Alignment with the EU legislation on industrial pollution and risk management is still at 
an early stage. Capacity constraints are hampering progress in implementing legislation on 
prevention of major accidents involving dangerous chemicals. Permitting is not fully 
compliant with all legal requirements and there is no independent monitoring of industrial 
pollution. The limited data on industrial pollution relies on companies’ self-monitoring and 
declaration. The enforcement capacity of the environment inspectorate is very limited. 
On chemicals, some positive steps have been taken towards aligning with the EU Regulation 
on registration, evaluation, authorisation and restriction of chemicals (REACH). However, the 
adoption of the implementing legislation and the establishment of adequate administrative 
structures are still needed. 
Administrative capacity for preparing strategic noise maps and action plans needs to be 
strengthened. 
No civil protection strategy is in place. The existing civil emergencies law and national plan 
are outdated and do not take into account recent institutional and organisational changes. The 
new civil protection law under elaboration is not yet finalised. There is very limited 
administrative capacity, and the envisaged creation of a civil protection agency has not 
materialised. Floods remain a major hazard; however no progress has been made on the 
transposition of the floods directive. The early warning system and hydrometric and 
meteorological system still need to be regulated. Albania is not yet a participating State of the 
Union Civil Protection Mechanism and is not linked to the Common Emergency 
Communication and Information System (CECIS) yet. In view of their future participation in 
the Union Civil Protection Mechanism, Albania needs to establish relevant Secure Trans 
European Services for Telematics between Administrations (sTESTA) connections as a 
precondition to connect to CECIS. 
Climate change 
Albania has achieved some level of preparation to climate change, but alignment with the EU 
acquis is still limited. Some progress was made by ratifying the Kigali Amendment to the 
Montreal Protocol. A national strategy on climate change consistent with the EU 2030 
framework on climate and energy policies needs to be adopted and a National Energy and 
Climate Plan in line with Energy Community recommendation has to be developed. No 
specific administrative structure for handling climate change issues is in place. 
Regarding its reporting obligation under the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change, Albania is preparing its Fourth National Communication and its First 
Biennial Update Report. 
The law on climate change and accompanying decisions, partly transposing provisions the EU 
Emissions Trading Directive, still need to be adopted. Further efforts should be made on 
emission standards for new cars and vans and related consumer information. Similar efforts 
are needed regarding effort sharing, geological storage of CO2, and greenhouse gas emissions 
from land use, land use change, and forestry. Considerable strengthening of administrative 
capacity, allocation of the necessary financial resources as well as awareness-raising activities 
are needed. 


===== PAGE 93 =====
 
92 
 
5.28.  Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection 
EU rules protect consumers’ economic interests and in relation to product safety, dangerous 
imitations and liability for defective products. The EU also ensures high common standards 
for tobacco control, blood, tissues, cells and organs, and medicines for human and veterinary 
use. The EU also ensures high common standards for upholding patients’ rights in cross-
border healthcare and tackling serious cross-border health threats including communicable 
diseases. 
Preparations are at an early stage in the area of consumer and health protection. There was 
some progress over the last year, notably on non-safety-related issues through further 
aligning legislation with the EU acquis, and strengthening the effectiveness of the Consumer 
Protection Commission (CPC). There was also progress on last year’s recommendation to 
improve access to services for vulnerable populations, through the adoption of the National 
Programme for Community Health Care. However, significant progress needs to be made to 
ensure everyone in Albania has healthcare coverage.  
In the coming year, the country should in particular: 
 further align its legislation with the acquis on substances of human origin and on 
medicines for human and veterinary use; 
 continue to improve access to services for vulnerable populations, including: women; 
Roma and Egyptian minorities; people with disabilities; and populations in rural or remote 
areas.  
Consumer protection 
On horizontal aspects, the capacity of the CPC and of other consumer protection bodies 
continued to be strengthened through training on EU legislation and on enforcement practices. 
On product safety, the Market Surveillance Inspectorate needs to be better staffed. National 
legislation is partly aligned with the EU acquis. On non-safety-related issues, during the 
reporting period amendments to the Law on consumer protection were adopted during the 
reporting period. These amendments aim at further alignment with the EU acquis in the area 
of consumer rights and alternative dispute resolution. Awareness-raising materials were made 
available on the CPC’s website.  
Public health 
On horizontal aspects, the 2016-2020 national health strategy, adopted in 2017, seeks to 
achieve universal healthcare coverage. However, efforts are needed to strengthen the 
governance of public hospitals and healthcare quality. Albania should ensure that appropriate 
funding and staffing are allocated to fully implement the strategy at both central and local 
level.  
National legislation on patients’ rights in cross-border healthcare has yet to be aligned 
with the EU acquis. The Ministry of Health and Social Protection and the National Agency 
for the Information Society are the authorities responsible for e-health.  
In the field of serious cross-border health threats including communicable diseases, the 
legal basis on communicable disease prevention and control is in place and is designed to be 
in line with the acquis. However, its implementation through secondary legislation is still 
lacking. There is a national alert, response and surveillance system for communicable 
diseases. However, no national plan for implementing international health regulations has 
been put in place yet. Albania does not yet have an antimicrobial resistance action plan. 


===== PAGE 94 =====
 
93 
 
On blood, tissues, cells and organs, the relevant legislation is still not fully aligned with the 
acquis on blood safety. On tobacco control, the Law to protect public health against tobacco 
products, which is designed to be aligned to the acquis, is being full implemented. 
Legislation on medicines for human and veterinary use is not aligned with the acquis. On 
health promotion for non-communicable diseases, there is a national cancer control plan. 
Appropriate structures for cancer screening services were also put in place, especially in the 
main urban areas, but a cancer registry is yet to be set up. Some developments can be reported 
in the area of mental health with the establishment of two specialised mental health services 
that will become fully operational in 2019. On nutrition and physical activity, malnutrition 
is a critical issue, especially for children and pregnant women. Albania is encouraged to 
develop a nutrition plan and increase awareness in school and community centres about the 
risks of malnutrition. The national legislation on pricing of medical devices is designed to be 
partly aligned with the acquis. 
On drug abuse prevention and harm reduction, prevention activities have taken place 
sporadically, mainly initiated by the Department of Health Promotion and the Institute of 
Public Health.  
On health inequalities, in January 2018 the Ministry of Health and Social Protection 
launched the National Programme of Community Health Care, which mainly aims at 
providing health care for marginalised Roma and Egyptian minorities. Further efforts are 
necessary to improve access to services for vulnerable populations, including: women; Roma 
and Egyptian minorities; people with disabilities; and populations in rural or remote areas. 
Although sexual and reproductive health services are available, the use of condoms continues 
to be very low. This exacerbates the increase in the number of diagnosed sexually transmitted 
infections, most significantly among women. Low diagnosis levels among the male 
population are because men take medical check-ups less frequently and have limited 
awareness of their reproductive health needs. A national programme on breast and cervical 
cancer screening is lacking. Protocols for breast cancer and cervical cancer have been drawn 
up, but still need to be approved and implemented.   
5.29.  Chapter 29: Customs union 
All Member States are part of the EU customs union and follow the same customs rules and 
procedures. This requires legislative alignment, adequate implementing and enforcement 
capacity, and access to the common computerised customs systems. 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of the customs union. Some progress was made, 
in particular by improving online customs procedures, shortening the time for processing of 
customs declarations and use of risk assessment.  
In the coming year, the country should in particular: 
→ approve legal provisions and develop the New Computerised Transit System;  
→ advance the registration of authorised economic operators; 
→ pursue the fight against smuggling, corruption and imports of counterfeit products. 
As regards customs legislation, the Customs Code is broadly aligned with the acquis. The 
country’s system for customs debt and guarantees is harmonised with EU rules. However, the 
customs declaration ‘scanning fees’ continue to contravene the Stabilisation and Association 
Agreement which prohibits customs duties or charges having equivalent effect on trade 
between the EU and Albania. The adoption by Parliament of national legislation and 
procedures aiming to implement the Common Transit is still pending. Albania is 


===== PAGE 95 =====
 
94 
 
implementing its new Authorized Economic Operator program. Awareness raising activities 
regarding the benefits, procedures and programs are taking place, while capacity development 
is still needed. 
Tariff suspensions and tariff ceilings are not planned at the moment. Binding tariff 
information and explanatory notes are published by the Albanian Customs Authority (ACA), 
and anonymised decisions on administrative appeals by the respective court. Rules of non-
preferential origin are included in the Customs Code. The Regional Convention on Pan-Euro-
Mediterranean preferential rules of origin is applied in Albania. 
The Customs Code's rules on valuation are aligned with EU rules. The risk management 
system is automated. It compares import, export and transit data against active risk profiles. 
The legislation on customs enforcement of intellectual property rights is harmonised with the 
acquis. The customs control system for drug precursors, dangerous chemical products and 
‘controlled substances’ is harmonised with the 1988 UN Convention against Illicit Traffic in 
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. Differences between the acquis and national 
rules on cash and goods transported in travellers’ baggage remain, regarding amounts to be 
declared and the declaration form. The ACA does not impose sanctions for non-declarations 
or misdeclarations, but confiscates the cash and passes it on to the police or Attorney 
General’s office for criminal prosecution. 
On administrative and operational capacity, the Business Strategy of the Customs 
Administration comprises the mission and strategic objectives for the period between 2017 
and 2021, including an objective to improve IT systems and platforms. Electronic local 
customs clearance is functioning, but IT systems are only fully interconnected with the 
Directorate General of Taxation and the Directorate General of Road Transport, while 
conditions for direct access are created to police and prosecution. In 2018, online customs 
procedures improved. 
5.30.  Chapter 30: External relations 
The EU has a common trade and commercial policy towards third countries, based on 
multilateral and bilateral agreements and autonomous measures. There are also EU rules in 
the field of humanitarian aid and development policy. 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of external relations. Some progress was made 
in improving the capacity for coordinating and facilitating trade policy and through the 
ratification of Additional Protocol 5 to the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA).  
In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
 continue to implement the national action plan on trade policy coordination and 
facilitation; 
 adopt the relevant legislation in the field of export control of dual-use goods;  
 strengthen the overall administrative capacity of the team in the Ministry of Finance and 
Economy dealing with trade with the EU and CEFTA);  
 implement actions under the multi-annual action plan for the development of a Regional 
Economic Area, in particular implement CEFTA Protocol 5 on Trade Facilitation, adopt 
and implement the pending CEFTA Protocol 6 on Trade in Services and negotiate and 
ensure a swift adoption of CEFTA Protocol 7 on Dispute Settlement. 
On the common commercial policy, Albania continued to coordinate its positions and align 
its policies closely with those of the EU, including within the WTO. It has ratified the WTO 
Trade Facilitation Agreement and notified its list of commitments, which now need to be 


===== PAGE 96 =====
 
95 
 
reviewed in order to speed up implementation. In addition, Albania needs to submit the 
notifications required under Articles 1.4, 10.6.2 and 12.2.2 of the WTO Trade Facilitation 
Agreement.  
There was some progress in the area of dual-use goods with the adoption in July 2018 of the 
law on state control over international transfer of military items and dual-use goods and 
technologies, aiming at partial alignment with the related EU acquis. Further approximation 
of legislation on the control of exports, transfer, brokering and transit of dual-use items and on 
the Common Military List of the European Union (EU Regulation 2017/2268) was followed 
through the February Government Decision. Albania has already adopted its national control 
list of dual-use goods in line with EU Regulations. Further alignment with the acquis on 
export controls of dual-use goods remains to be completed. A specific sector on Dangerous 
Goods, Dual Use and Illegal Trafficking is established as part of the anti-trafficking 
directorate in the General Directorate of Customs. There has been no progress towards 
Albania’s participation in the multilateral export control regimes. Albania has not transposed 
the legislation related to the EU regulation concerning trade in certain goods, which could be 
used for capital punishment, torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or 
punishment.  
As concerns bilateral agreements with third countries, during the reporting period Albania 
signed 12 new agreements on economic/trade/technical cooperation. In total, it now has 36 
such agreements in place, including 13 with EU Member States. An agreement on economic 
cooperation between the governments of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina was adopted in 
principle in December 2018. Albania has in place Bilateral Investment Treaties  with 45 
countries and 6 more are under negotiation with Slovakia, Iran, Canada, Morocco, Lebanon 
and Iceland. Negotiations for amending the free trade agreement with Turkey continue, 
focusing on the inclusion of specifications related to trade in services and investments. 
Expression of interest for establishing a joint committee/economic cooperation agreement 
have been bilaterally exchanged with Algeria, Egypt, Cuba, India, Norway, Georgia, and 
Ukraine.  
In 2019, Albania holds the chairmanship in office of CEFTA. In addition, it made important 
commitments at the WB6 summits in Trieste, London and Durres to implement a multiannual 
action plan for developing a Regional Economic Area (REA) in the Western Balkans. 
Implementing the action plan will deepen and widen economic integration within the region, 
based on EU rules and standards. The government of Albania has established a mechanism for 
implementing and monitoring the REA. In April 2018, Albania adopted and ratified the law 
on adoption of additional Protocol 5 of the agreement with CEFTA countries. 
Administrative and operational capacity needs to be strengthened: following the restructuring 
of the Ministry of Finance and Economy, organisational units in charge of trade with the EU, 
CEFTA and WTO were covered by an ad hoc working group composed of 4 experts until the 
beginning of 2018. A structure on trade issues composed of 2 specialists and 1 chief of sector 
is under establishment. Currently the tasks are performed by the staff of the Directorate of 
Economic Policies in the Ministry, covering also the functions of the Technical Secretariat for 
the National Committee for Trade Policy and Facilitation. A permanent stable structure 
dealing with trade-related issues should be operational.  
Albania has no development policy framework for cooperation/aid or agency for 
development cooperation with third countries. The 2001 Law on Non-Profit Organisations 
recognises the potential activities of such organisations in the field of humanitarian aid and 
entitles them to carry out development and humanitarian aid activities inside and outside 
Albania. 


===== PAGE 97 =====
 
96 
 
5.31.  Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy 
Member States must be able to conduct political dialogue under EU foreign, security and 
defence policy, to align with EU statements, to take part in EU actions and to apply agreed 
sanctions and restrictive measures. 
Albania has a good level of preparation. Some progress was made through the ongoing 
security upgrade of storage facilities for armaments and ammunition. A virtual firearms focal 
point was set up in in the Albanian State Police. Albania continued to participate in military 
crisis-management missions and to fully align with EU positions.  
In the coming year, the country should in particular: 
 finalise the establishment of a firearms focal point in the Albanian State Police, implement 
the newly adopted strategy on small arms and light weapons, and improve the security of 
storage facilities for armaments and ammunition. 
The political dialogue between the EU and Albania on foreign and security policy issues 
continued. A political dialogue between the EU and Albania on UN issues took place in 
October 2018. (For more information on relations with other enlargement countries and EU 
Member States, see Political criteria — Regional issues and international obligations). 
Albania’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Defence have appropriate structures to 
participate in the common foreign and security policy and the common security and defence 
policy. On the common foreign and security policy (CFSP), Albania supports the global 
strategy for the EU’s foreign and security policy. When it was invited, Albania aligned with 
all relevant Council decisions and High-Representative declarations on behalf of the EU 
(100% alignment). 
Albania maintains a 2003 bilateral immunity agreement with the United States, granting 
exemptions for US citizens from the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court. In 
doing so, it does not comply with the EU common positions on the integrity of the Rome 
Statute or with the related EU guiding principles on bilateral immunity agreements. As 
mentioned in the previous reports, Albania needs to align with the EU position. 
Albania adopted in February 2019 a new national strategy on small arms and light weapons 
for the period 2019-2024. It also adopted a corresponding action plan for 2019-2021. Albania 
signed the regional ‘Roadmap for a sustainable solution to the illegal possession, misuse and 
trafficking of small arms and light weapons and their ammunition in the Western Balkans by 
2024’ at a London summit in July 2018. 
Albania made further progress in improving the security of storage facilities for armaments 
and ammunition. The security upgrade of the Albanian State Police’s central armament store 
in Mullet was completed in September. The security upgrade of two evidence rooms in the 
police directorates in Tirana and Durres was also completed. Security upgrades of the State 
Police’s tunnel-storage in Mullet and of the Ministry of Defence’s ammunition and armament 
storages in Miraka and Zall-Herr are planned for 2019. Albania made further progress in 
implementing the action plan for destroying surplus weaponry. Clearance of hotspots 
contaminated with unexploded ammunition continues. 
A virtual firearms focal point was set up in the Albanian State Police in May 2018. Its 
incorporation into the department’s structure is expected in the first half of 2019. Members of 
the firearms focal point received training, and in November the focal point was equipped with 
the required software tools for sharing data and analysis on firearms. This will improve the 
ability of law enforcement and the judiciary to analyse and coordinate actions against firearms 


===== PAGE 98 =====
 
97 
 
misuse and trafficking. A national electronic registry for weapons was set up in 2015, and is 
now fully functional. 
Albania continued to actively participate in regional and international processes for the 
exchange of information and good practices in the field of small arms and light weapons. It 
continued to participate in some, but not all, international export control arrangements and 
instruments on non-proliferation. The next step would be for Albania to start complying with 
the Wassenaar Arrangement. Albania continued to engage actively with international 
organisations. It maintained a robust presence in a number of NATO missions, including 
some of strategic importance for the EU (such as NATO’s Maritime Group in the Aegean 
Sea). Albania will hold the chair of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe 
2020 and is a candidate for a non-permanent seat in the United Nations Security Council in 
2022/2023. 
On security measures, negotiations are continuing on the arrangements for implementing the 
agreement on security procedures for exchanging and protecting classified information, 
signed between the EU and Albania in March 2016. Concluding the negotiations will allow 
the agreement to enter into force. Albania continued to actively participate in military crisis 
management missions under the common security and defence policy (CSDP), notably 
EUFOR Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina and EUTM Mali. The country also offered to 
contribute to the EU battle groups in 2024. 
In November 2018, Albania officially applied to participate in the EU’s Hybrid Risk Survey. 
Its goal in participating was to identify its key vulnerabilities and use EU instruments to get 
assistance to build capacity, thus strengthening its resilience against hybrid threats. In January 
2019, the survey was launched with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
5.32.  Chapter 32: Financial control 
The EU promotes the reform of national governance systems to enhance managerial 
accountability, sound financial management of income and expenditure, and external audit of 
public funds. The financial control rules further protect the EU’s financial interests against 
fraud in the management of EU funds and the Euro against counterfeiting. 
Albania is moderately prepared in this area. Some progress was made during the reporting 
period with the legal adoption of a mechanism for coordination, monitoring and reporting of 
key reforms on good governance, including on public internal financial control (PIFC), and 
with the adoption of a risk-based external audit approach. However, Albania has not yet 
adopted, a comprehensive PIFC policy paper, focusing on managerial accountability and all 
required legislative changes, remains to be adopted. The proper and effective functioning of 
internal control  is not yet ensured across all budget entities and the timely implementation of 
internal and external audit recommendations should be improved. Since only partial progress was made 
with the Commission’s 2018 recommendations, these remain valid. 
In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
 adopt and start implementing a comprehensive PIFC policy paper with the specific focus 
on the definition and implementation of managerial accountability and ensure coordinated 
monitoring and reporting of all related reforms; 
 ensure effective follow-up to the annual PIFC report by addressing systemic weaknesses;  
 ensure more systematic and timely implementation of external audit recommendations. 


===== PAGE 99 =====
 
98 
 
Public internal financial control  
A strategic framework for PIFC is partially in place. A comprehensive policy on internal 
control with a specific focus on the definition and implementation of managerial 
accountability needs still to be developed. A number of enabling conditions for PIFC 
implementation are addressed in the public administration reform strategy and its action plan, 
while basic internal control and audit reform requirements are addressed in the 2014-2020 
public financial management reform strategy and its action plan. In October 2018 the 
government set up an Integrated Policy Management Group for Good Governance to improve 
coordination, monitoring and reporting of the public administration, public financial 
management and PIFC reforms, but the mechanism is yet to become fully operational to 
ensure an integrated monitoring and reporting system.  
Managerial accountability is not yet well embedded in the administrative culture. The 
financial management and control law defines accountability only in relation to financial 
management. Decision-making in the institutions is centralised to the minister with very little 
delegation to senior and middle management. Following the 2017 restructuring, all ministries 
now have managerial structures broadly aligned with the budget structure. Accountability and 
reporting lines between agencies and their parent institutions are unclear. The Law on State 
Administration, Law on civil servants and relevant laws on policy planning and Budget 
System Law need to be assessed. If necessary, these laws should be amended, to ensure that 
they provide a consistent basis for implementation of delegated managerial accountability. 
(See Public administration reform). 
The legislation on internal control is largely in line with international standards. Although an 
estimated 95% of Albanian state institutions have internal control procedures in place, 
implementation is not systematic in all institutions. Risk management is still at an early stage, 
although about two thirds of institutions have prepared risk registers and corresponding action 
plans. Local governments have made the least progress in preparing risk registers. 
Declarations of assurance are systematically signed by senior management, but in the absence 
of a delegation framework, this remains more of a formal exercise. A centralised budget 
inspection function exists within the Ministry of Finance.  
The legislation on internal audit practice is in line with international standards. In 2018, the 
number of certified auditors in the public sector increased. Internal audit still focuses mainly 
on reviewing financial compliance. The timely implementation of internal audit 
recommendations should improve. 
The Central Harmonisation Unit (CHU) provides methodological guidance and monitors 
implementation on the basis of internal control reviews and by analysing self-assessment 
reports that it receives from institutions. In 2018, the CHU developed a methodology for 
internal control quality reviews and started to undertake such reviews. The annual PIFC report 
is presented to the Council of Ministers and discussed in the Parliament. The government still 
needs to ensure a more systematic follow-up to the findings of the report. 
External audit 
Albania’s constitutional and legal framework provides for independence of the State Audit 
Institution (SAI) in line with the standards of the International Organisation of Supreme Audit 
Institutions (INTOSAI). However full implementation of the legal framework still needs to be 
ensured.  
The large quantity of annual audit reports produced by the SAI impacts its institutional 
capacity. In recent years the SAI has taken measures to improve the professional 


===== PAGE 100 =====
 
99 
 
development of its audit staff. The SAI is implementing the 2018-22 strategic development 
plan and the 2017-19 communication strategy. 
The quality of audit work needs to be further improved, as the audit activities do not yet 
fully comply with the INTOSAI standards. The SAI continues to focus on compliance and 
regularity audits determining economic damage and violation of rules, rather than on audits 
that could help prevent such damage in the first place. Financial audits do not yet result in 
professional and qualified audit opinions, even though in 2018 SAI issued for the first time an 
opinion on the execution of the 2017 state budget. In June 2018, the SAI adopted a risk-based 
external audit approach. The number of performance audits increased to 18 in 2018, in 
comparison to 15 in 2017.  
The impact of audit work is limited, and the timely implementation of audit 
recommendations should be improved. Audit reports are summarised quarterly and published 
on a regular basis on the SAI website. The 2017 Memorandum of Understanding between SAI 
and Ministry of Finance on monitoring the follow-up of audit recommendations resulted in 
the creation of a technical secretariat with representatives of both parties. The first meeting 
was held in December 2018 to elect its Chairman and to agree upon its regulation and action 
plan 2019. 
Protection of the EU’s financial interests  
Albania has ensured some level of acquis alignment. The national anti-fraud coordination 
service (AFCOS) is a unit within the Directorate of Financial Inspection in the Ministry of 
Finance and Economy. An AFCOS network, involving other relevant authorities, has been set 
up and it meets regularly. A manual for the management of irregularities in EU funds was 
adopted during the reporting period. Albania cooperates with the European Commission 
during investigations and reports to the Commission on irregularities and suspected fraud 
cases. Albania has not reported any cases via an online Irregularity Management System in 
2018. So far, only one case has been reported through the system in 2015. There is no 
national anti-fraud strategy yet in place. Albania still needs to develop a solid track record 
in investigations and reporting on irregularities. 
Protection of the euro against counterfeiting 
Albania has not yet ratified the 1929 International Convention for the Suppression of 
Counterfeiting Currency. Albania is partially aligned with the acquis regarding the definition 
of counterfeiting banknotes and coins, as well as the procedures for gathering, storing and 
withdrawing them from circulation. Technical analysis is performed by the National 
Analysis Centre of the Bank of Albania. Cooperation at the national and international level is 
ongoing. In August 2018, the Bank of Albania joined the Europol Platform for Experts. A 
cooperation agreement with the European Commission on coins is in place, while an 
agreement on banknotes with the European Central Bank is pending. Albania participates in 
the actions of the Pericles 2020 programme. 
5.33.  Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions 
This chapter covers the rules governing the funding of the EU budget (‘own resources’). 
These resources mainly consist of: (i) contributions based on the gross national income of 
each Member State; (ii) customs duties; and (iii) a resource based on value-added tax. 
Member States must have the appropriate administrative capacity to adequately coordinate 
and ensure the correct calculation, collection, payment and control of own resources.  
Albania has some level of preparation in this area. Some progress was made in the 
underlying policy areas that affect the functioning of the EU funding system, through the 


===== PAGE 101 =====
 
100 
 
progress in implementation of the 2016 Organic Budget Law, the fiscal rule and the 
continuation of the public finance management reform.  
Albania needs to make further progress on last year’s recommendations and should therefore 
make efforts to: 
 align its relevant legislation with the requirements of the European System of National 
and Regional Accounts (ESA 2010); 
 align its legislation with the EU provisions on VAT and customs duties; 
 set up solid coordination structures, implementing rules and working procedures to ensure 
that it will be able to collect, control, manage and report on its own resources in line with 
the EU acquis. 
There was some progress on the underlying policy areas affecting indirectly the own 
resources system (see chapters 16-Taxation, 18-Statistics, 29-Customs union and 32–
Financial control). 
Albania has structures in place for levying customs duties at the point of import. It operates a 
national VAT system. VAT tax base was increased in 2018 by lowering the VAT registration 
threshold.  
Concerning the Gross National Income (GNI) resource, some progress was made on the 
alignment with ESA 2010 standards, in methodological improvements, faster publication of 
statistics and increased number of statistical tables reported to Eurostat. Excessive Deficit 
Procedure tables under the Government Finance Statistics (GFS) methodology were 
transmitted to Eurostat in April 2018 for the years 2013-2017. National Accounts data, 
estimates of GDP and Gross National Income (GNI) indicators are submitted to Eurostat 
through the ESA 2010 transmission program. However, they are only partially based on ESA 
2010 standards. Considerable efforts remain necessary to ensure the exhaustiveness of 
national accounts and GNI calculations.  
Preparations for improving the estimation of Non-Observed Economy in Albania started and 
the first results are expected in 2019. Additional efforts are needed to ensure that effective 
measures are taken to formalise the grey economy and combat fiscal evasion and customs 
duty fraud. 
On administrative infrastructure, the Ministry of Finance and Economy has overall 
responsibility for financial and budgetary issues. Albania will need to work on setting up the 
relevant institutions involved in the own resources system, a coordination body and 
implementing rules. These are needed to ensure that from accession it will be able to correctly 
calculate, forecast, account for, collect, pay, control and report to the EU on own resources in 
line with the acquis. 
 
 


===== PAGE 102 =====
 
101 
 
ANNEX I – RELATIONS BETWEEN THE EU AND ALBANIA  
 
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement between Albania and the EU came into force 
in April 2009. Albania presented its application for membership of the European Union on 28 
April 2009. The European Council of June 2014 endorsed the decision of the General Affairs 
Council granting Albania candidate status. In November 2016 in view of the progress in 
meeting the five key priorities, the Commission recommended opening accession negotiations 
with Albania subject to credible and tangible progress in the implementation of the justice 
reform, in particular the re-evaluation of judges and prosecutors (vetting). In April 2018, 
having positively assessed the additional progress, the Commission then recommended 
unconditionally that the Council decides that accession negotiations be opened with Albania, 
at the same time encouraging Albania to maintain and deepen the reform momentum in the 
key field of the rule of law.  
In the reporting period, Albania has implemented smoothly its obligations under the 
Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA). Regular political and economic dialogue 
between the EU and Albania has continued through the relevant structures under the SAA. 
The ninth meeting of the SAA Committee was held in October 2018 in Tirana. The SAA 
Council gathered in November 2018 in Brussels. Meetings of subcommittees and of the 
special group on public administration reform were also regularly held. The Stabilisation and 
Association Parliamentary Committee gathered in Tirana in February 2018 and in Brussels in 
November 2018.  
Visa liberalisation for citizens of Albania travelling to the Schengen area has been in force 
since December 2010. As part of the monitoring mechanism in place since visa liberalisation, 
the Commission has been regularly assessing the progress made by the country in 
implementing reforms introduced under the visa roadmap. The monitoring mechanism also 
includes an alert mechanism to prevent abuses, coordinated by the European Border and 
Coast Guard Agency (EBCGA).  
A readmission agreement between the EU and Albania has been in force since 2006. On 1 
May 2019 the status agreement for operational cooperation with EBCGA has entered into 
force; this will enable the deployment of EBCG teams on the Albanian territory and ensure a 
better management of irregular migration. In March 2019, Albania signed a working 
arrangement with the EMCDDA, which will facilitate information exchange between the EU 
and Albania, the implementation of capacity building activities, and the development of data 
collection and reporting related to drugs. 
The EU provided financial assistance to Albania under the Instrument for Pre-accession 
Assistance (IPA I) in 2007-2013 with a total allocation of EUR 594 million. The assistance 
has been predominantly implemented under direct management by the EU Delegation in 
Tirana. The indirect management modality has been introduced with a pilot approach for the 
IPA 2012 and 2013 national programmes. Under IPA II (2014-2020), Albania benefits, in line 
with the priorities set out in the indicative strategy paper, from pre-accession assistance with a 
total indicative allocation of EUR 649.4 million. The Framework Agreement for IPA II 
entered into force in April 2015. The 2014-2017 action programmes for Albania provide EUR 
170 million to promote reforms in key sectors such as democracy and governance and rule of 
law and fundamental rights and provide EUR 113 million to invest in competitiveness and 
growth. For the 2018 action programme for Albania, EUR 64 million for rule of law and 
justice reform, and EUR 30 million for environment protection and economic development 
have been earmarked. They include budget support operations for public finance 
management, public administration and justice reform, employment and vocational education 


===== PAGE 103 =====
 
102 
 
and training, home affairs and transport as well as an EU integration facility. Albania benefits 
from support under the IPA multi-country programme and it participates in five cross-border 
cooperation programmes with neighbouring Western Balkan countries and Member States, as 
well as in transnational cooperation programmes under the European Regional Development 
Fund and the IPA Adriatic cross-border programme. Albania participates with IPA support in 
the EU programmes Erasmus+, Creative Europe (Culture and Media strands), Employment 
and Social Innovation, Horizon 2020, Customs 2020, Fiscalis 2020, Competitiveness of 
Enterprises and Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises Programme (COSME) and Europe for 
Citizens. 
 


===== PAGE 104 =====
 
103 
 
 
ANNEX II – STATISTICAL ANNEX 
STATISTICAL DATA (as of 29.04.2019) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Albania 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Basic data 
Note 2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Population (thousand) 
 
3 003.3 
2 897.8 
2 892.4 
2 885.8 
2 875.6 
2 876.6 
Total area of the country (km²) 
 
28 750 
28 750 
28 750 
28 750 
28 750 
28 750 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National accounts 
Note 2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Gross domestic product (GDP) (million national currency) 
 
872 735 
1 350 05
3 
1 395 30
5 
1 434 30
7 
1 472 47
9 
1 551 28
1p 
Gross domestic product (GDP) (million euro) 
 
7 091 
9 625 
9 969 
10 264 
10 720 
11 564p 
GDP (euro per capita) 
 
2 400 
3 300 
3 500 
3 600 
3 700 
4 000p 
GDP per capita (in purchasing power standards (PPS)) 
 
5 400 
7 800 
8 300 
8 800 
8 600 
9 100p 
GDP per capita (in PPS), relative to the EU average (EU-28 = 100)  
22 
29 
30 
30 
30 
30p 
Real GDP growth rate: change on previous year of GDP volume 
(%) 
 
5.9 
1.0 
1.8 
2.2 
3.3 
3.8p 
Employment growth (national accounts data), relative to the 
previous year (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Labour productivity growth: growth in GDP (in volume) per 
person employed, relative to the previous year (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 


===== PAGE 105 =====
 
104 
 
Unit labour cost growth, relative to the previous year (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
**3 year change (T/T-3) in the nominal unit labour cost growth 
index (2010 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Labour productivity per person employed: GDP (in PPS) per 
person employed relative to EU average (EU-28 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Gross value added by main sectors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries (%) 
 
20.5 
22.4 
22.9 
22.5 
22.6 
21.8p 
Industry (%) 
 
11.2 
14.6 
14.8 
14.6 
14.0 
12.8p 
Construction (%) 
 
18.1 
11.8 
9.9 
10.1 
10.2 
10.5p 
Services (%) 
 
50.2 
51.2 
52.4 
52.8 
53.2 
54.9p 
Final consumption expenditure, as a share of GDP (%) 
 
88.2 
91.1b 
92.2 
91.8 
92.2 
91.2p 
Gross fixed capital formation, as a share of GDP (%) 
 
38.1 
26.1b 
24.2 
24.4 
24.4 
24.5p 
Changes in inventories, as a share of GDP (%) 
 
: 
2.0b 
1.5 
1.4 
0.9 
0.5p 
Exports of goods and services, relative to GDP (%) 
 
25.2 
28.9b 
28.2 
27.3 
29.0 
31.6p 
Imports of goods and services, relative to GDP (%) 
 
49.1 
47.0b 
47.2 
44.5 
45.8 
46.6p 
Gross fixed capital formation by the general government sector, as 
a percentage of GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business 
Note 2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Industrial production volume index (2010 = 100) 
 
55.4 
176.5 
179.1 
175.3 
143.8 
142.9 
Number of active enterprises (number) 
1) 
53 869 
78 950 
78 920 
95 184 
98 262 
: 
Birth rate: number of enterprise births in the reference period (t) 
divided by the number of enterprises active in t (%) 
 
18.2 
10.9 
15.4 
: 
19.5 
15.3 


===== PAGE 106 =====
 
105 
 
Death rate: number of enterprise deaths in the reference period (t) 
divided by the number of enterprises active in t (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
People employed in SMEs as a share of all persons employed 
(within the non-financial business economy) (%) 
2) 
81.1 
81.0 
80.1 
81.7 
81.4 
: 
Value added by SMEs (in the non-financial business economy) 
(EUR million) 
2) 
937 
1 867 
1 949 
2 083 
2 276 
: 
Total value added (in the non-financial business economy) (EUR 
million) 
2) 
1 493 
2 803 
2 871 
3 124 
3 388 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inflation rate and house prices 
Note 2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Consumer price index (CPI), change relative to the previous year 
(%) 
 
2.4 
1.9 
1.6 
1.9 
1.3 
2.0 
**Annual change in the deflated house price index (2010 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Balance of payments 
Note 2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Balance of payments: current account total (million euro) 
3) 
-471 
-891 
-1 076 
-884 
-812 
-866 
Balance of payments current account: trade balance (million euro) 
3) 
-1 659 
-1 963 
-2 216 
-2 299 
-2 603 
-2 824 
Balance of payments current account: net services (million euro) 
3) 
-32 
226 
323 
525 
797 
1 082 
Balance of payments current account: net balance for primary 
income (million euro) 
3) 
209 
166 
91 
122 
174 
29 
Balance of payments current account: net balance for secondary 
income (million euro) 
3) 
1 011 
680 
725 
768 
821 
848 
Net balance for primary and secondary income: of which 
government transfers (million euro) 
3) 
50 
17 
9 
6 
48 
70 


===== PAGE 107 =====
 
106 
 
**3 year backward moving average of the current account balance 
relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
-10.8 
-10.1 
-9.6 
-9.0p 
-7.9p 
**Five year change in share of world exports of goods and services 
(%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Net balance (inward - outward) of foreign direct investment (FDI) 
(million euro) 
 
250.3 
923.2 
811.5 
818.4 
936.5 
993.8 
Foreign direct investment (FDI) abroad (million euro) 
 
8.3 
30.0 
25.1 
34.0 
57.9 
23.2 
of which FDI of the reporting economy in the EU-28 countries 
(million euro) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
9.9 
: 
Foreign direct investment (FDI) in the reporting economy (million 
euro) 
 
258.6 
953.2 
836.6 
852.4 
994.4 
1 017.0 
of which FDI of the EU-28 countries in the reporting economy 
(million euro) 
 
: 
259.5 
272.7 
319.5 
242.3 
474.3 
**Net international investment position, relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
-42.9 
-43.2 
-44.3 
-47.1 
Year on year rate of change in gross inflow of remittances (in 
national currency) from migrant workers (%) 
 
16.1 
-18.9 
8.0 
1.2 
0.9 
1.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Public finance 
Note 2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
***General government deficit / surplus, relative to GDP (%) 
 
-3.4 
-5.0 
-5.2 
-4.1 
-1.8 
-2.0 
***General government gross debt relative to GDP (%) 
 
53.8 
61.7 
66.1 
68.8 
68.6 
66.8 
Total  government revenues, as a percentage of GDP (%) 
 
26.3 
24.2 
26.3 
26.4 
27.6 
27.7 
Total government expenditure, as a percentage of GDP (%) 
 
29.7 
29.2 
31.5 
30.5 
29.4 
29.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 108 =====
 
107 
 
Financial indicators 
Note 2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Gross external debt of the whole economy, relative to GDP (%) 
3) 
26.6 
66.2 
69.5 
74.4 
73.4p 
68.7 
Gross external debt of the whole economy, relative to total exports 
(%) 
3) 
105.7 
228.8 
246.3 
272.7 
253.5 
217.6 
Money supply: M1 (banknotes, coins, overnight deposits, million 
euro) 
 
1 969 
2 109 
2 524 
2 749 
3 170 
3 441 
Money supply: M2 (M1 plus deposits with maturity up to two 
years, million euro) 
 
3 879 
4 942 
5 161 
5 174 
5 365 
5 504 
Money supply: M3 (M2 plus marketable instruments, million euro)  
5 415 
8 192 
8 538 
8 703 
9 198 
9 438 
Total credit by monetary financial institutions to residents 
(consolidated) (million euro) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
**Annual change in financial sector liabilities (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
**Private credit flow, consolidated, relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
**Private debt, consolidated, relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Interest rates: day-to-day money rate, per annum (%) 
4) 
4.37 
3.80 
2.92 
2.26 
1.49 
1.34 
Lending interest rate (one year), per annum (%) 
5) 
12.93 
9.52 
7.66 
7.77 
5.89 
5.98 
Deposit interest rate (one year), per annum (%) 
6) 
5.23 
4.17 
1.92 
1.35 
0.80 
0.75 
Euro exchange rates: average of period (1 euro = … national 
currency) 
 
123.08 
140.26 
139.97 
139.74 
137.36 
134.15 
Trade-weighted effective exchange rate index, 42 countries (2005 
= 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
**3 year change (T/T-3) in the trade-weighted effective exchange 
rate index, 42 countries (2005 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Value of reserve assets (including gold) (million euro) 
 
1 368 
2 015 
2 192 
2 880 
2 945 
2 996 


===== PAGE 109 =====
 
108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
External trade in goods 
Note 2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Value of imports: all goods, all partners (million euro) 
 
2 431 
3 699 
3 941 
3 882 
4 169 
4 648 
Value of exports: all goods, all partners (million euro) 
 
182 
1 761 
1 827 
1 728 
1 771 
2 026 
Trade balance: all goods, all partners (million euro) 
 
-1 803 
-1 938 
-2 114 
-2 154 
-2 399 
-2 622 
Terms of trade (export price index / import price index * 100) 
(number) 
 
124 
119 
119 
120 
116 
119 
Share of exports to EU-28 countries in value of total exports (%) 
 
66.5 
76.7 
77.4 
75.4 
77.9 
77.2 
Share of imports from EU-28 countries in value of total imports 
(%) 
 
66.9 
64.3 
61.1 
61.8 
63.1 
61.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Demography 
Note 2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Crude rate of natural change of population (natural growth rate): 
number of births minus deaths (per thousand inhabitants) 
 
6.4 
5.3 
5.2 
3.6 
3.6 
3.0 
Infant mortality rate deaths of children under one year of age (per 
thousand live births) 
 
7.4 
7.9 
7.9 
7.1 
8.7 
8.0 
Life expectancy at birth: male (years) 
 
: 
76.0 
76.4 
76.2e 
77.1 
77.1 
Life expectancy at birth: female (years) 
 
: 
80.1 
80.1 
79.7e 
80.1 
80.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Labour market 
Note 2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Economic activity rate for persons aged 20–64: proportion of the 
population aged 20–64 that is economically active (%) 
 
: 
67.6e 
68.6e 
71.3e 
73.3e 
73.9 
*Employment rate for persons aged 20–64: proportion of the 
population aged 20–64 that are in employment (%) 
 
: 
56.7e 
56.6e 
59.3e 
62.1e 
63.9 


===== PAGE 110 =====
 
109 
 
Male employment rate for persons aged 20–64 (%) 
 
: 
64.8e 
65.2e 
68.1e 
69.4e 
72.1 
Female employment rate for persons aged 20–64 (%) 
 
: 
49.3e 
48.5e 
50.7e 
55.0e 
55.6 
Employment rate for persons aged 55–64: proportion of the 
population aged 55–64 that are in employment (%) 
 
: 
51.1e 
51.2e 
53.6e 
54.8e 
55.5e 
Employment by main sectors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries (%) 
 
: 
44.0e 
42.7e 
41.3e 
40.2e 
38.2e 
Industry (%) 
 
: 
9.7e 
11.0e 
11.6e 
12.8e 
12.5e 
Construction (%) 
 
: 
7.1e 
6.4e 
6.9e 
6.5e 
6.9e 
Services (%) 
7) 
: 
39.2e 
39.9e 
40.2e 
40.5e 
42.4e 
People employed in the public sector as a share of total 
employment, persons aged 20–64 (%) 
 
: 
17.8e 
17.5e 
16.7e 
15.6e 
16.4e 
People employed in the private sector as a share of total 
employment, persons aged 20–64 (%) 
 
: 
82.2e 
82.5e 
83.3e 
84.4e 
83.6e 
Unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force that is 
unemployed (%) 
8) 
13.8 
15.9e 
17.5e 
17.1e 
15.2e 
13.7e 
Male unemployment rate (%) 
8) 
11.8 
17.8e 
19.2e 
17.1e 
15.9e 
14.6e 
Female unemployment rate (%) 
8) 
16.8 
13.5e 
15.2e 
17.1e 
14.4e 
12.6e 
Youth unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force aged 15–
24 that is unemployed (%) 
 
: 
31.4e 
39.0e 
39.8e 
36.5e 
31.9e 
Long-term unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force that 
has been unemployed for 12 months or more (%) 
 
: 
11.5e 
11.2e 
11.3e 
10.1e 
8.9e 
Unemployment rate for persons (aged 25–64) having completed at 
most lower secondary education (ISCED levels 0-2) (%) 
 
: 
13.6e 
13.4e 
12.0e 
11.8e 
11.2 


===== PAGE 111 =====
 
110 
 
Unemployment rate for persons (aged 25–64) having completed 
tertiary education (ISCED levels 5-8) (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
13.3e 
11.7e 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social cohesion 
Note 2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Average nominal monthly wages and salaries (national currency) 
9) 
28 822 
52 150 
53 025 
54 000 
54 488 
59 812 
Index of real wages and salaries (index of nominal wages and 
salaries divided by the inflation index) (2010 = 100) 
9) 
85.8 
111.1 
111.2 
111.1 
110.7 
118.8 
GINI coefficient 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Poverty gap 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
*Early leavers from education and training: proportion of the 
population aged 18–24 with at most lower secondary education 
who are not in further education or training (%) 
 
: 
30.6e 
26.0e 
21.3e 
19.6e 
19.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Standard of living 
Note 2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Number of passenger cars relative to population size (number per 
thousand population) 
 
75.0 
117.7 
130.7 
139.9 
151.6 
146.7 
Number of mobile phone subscriptions relative to population size 
(number per thousand population) 
 
640.7e 
1 822.9 
1 704.1 
1 655.7 
1 794.4 
1 874.8 
Mobile broadband penetration (per 100 inhabitants) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Fixed broadband penetration (per 100 inhabitants) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Infrastructure 
Note 2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Density of railway network (lines in operation per thousand km²) 
 
15.7 
12.6 
12.6 
13.8 
12.2 
12.2 


===== PAGE 112 =====
 
111 
 
Length of motorways (kilometres) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Innovation and research 
Note 2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Public expenditure on education relative to GDP (%) 
 
3.2 
3.3 
3.3 
3.1 
3.1p 
3.1p 
*Gross domestic expenditure on R&D relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Government 
budget 
appropriations 
or 
outlays 
on 
R&D 
(GBAORD), as a percentage of GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Percentage of households who have internet access at home (%) 
 
: 
: 
23.8 
25.0 
29.4 
30.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environment 
Note 2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
*Index of greenhouse gas emissions,  CO2 equivalent (1990 = 100) 
 
94 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Energy intensity of the economy (kg of oil equivalent per 1 000 
euro GDP at 2010 constant prices) 
 
296.2 
250.3 
244.9 
223.7 
221.6 
224.6 
Electricity generated from renewable sources relative to gross 
electricity consumption (%) 
 
90.0 
75.0 
60.6 
80.8 
100.5 
60.8 
Road share of inland freight transport (based on tonne-km) (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Energy 
Note 2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Primary production of all energy products (thousand TOE) 
 
1 219 
2 034 
2 013 
2 073 
1 943 
1 634 
Primary production of crude oil (thousand TOE) 
 
500 
1 207 
1 368 
1 279 
1 056 
959 
Primary production of solid fuels (thousand TOE) 
 
11 
1 
0 
34 
2 
68 
Primary production of gas (thousand TOE) 
 
9 
15 
25 
27 
35 
37 
Net imports of all energy products (thousand TOE) 
 
881 
604 
682 
280 
461 
920 


===== PAGE 113 =====
 
112 
 
Gross inland energy consumption (thousand TOE) 
 
2 182 
2 365 
2 355 
2 199 
2 250 
2 368 
Gross electricity generation (GWh) 
 
5 524 
6 959 
4 724 
5 895 
7 782 
4 526 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture 
Note 2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Agricultural production volume index of goods and services (at 
producer prices) (2010 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Utilised agricultural area (thousand hectares) 
 
1 120 
1 190 
1 178 
1 175 
1 174 
1 174 
Livestock numbers: live bovine animals (thousand heads, end of 
period) 
 
634 
498 
500 
504 
492 
475 
Livestock numbers: live swine (thousand heads, end of period) 
 
152 
152 
172 
171 
181 
180 
Livestock numbers: live sheep and live goats (thousand heads, end 
of period) 
 
2 770 
2 723 
2 800 
2 751 
2 913 
2 859 
Raw milk available on farms (thousand tonnes) 
 
1 102 
1 131 
1 133 
1 131 
1 145 
1 156 
Harvested crop production: cereals (including rice) (thousand 
tonnes) 
10) 
508 
703 
700 
696 
698 
702 
Harvested crop production: sugar beet (thousand tonnes) 
 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Harvested crop production: vegetables (thousand tonnes) 
 
688 
924 
950 
1 030 
1 129 
1 152 
 
 
: = not available 
b = break in series 
e = estimated value 
p = provisional 
s = Eurostat estimate 
* = Europe 2020 indicator 
** = Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure (MIP) indicator 


===== PAGE 114 =====
 
113 
 
*** = The government deficit and debt data of enlargement countries are published on 
an "as is" basis and without any assurance as regards their quality and adherence to 
ESA rules. 
 
 
 
Footnotes: 
 
 
1) 
The Albanian Government is implementing an action plan to reduce the informal 
economy. As result, 56 787 active enterprises were registered for the first time in the 
statistical business register in 2015. Most of them are not new entities for 2015. 
2) 
2006: based on NACE Rev. 1.1; coverage is Divisions 10 to 74. 2013-2016: based on 
NACE Rev. 2; coverage is Divisions 05 to 82 and 95. 
3) 
2006: based on balance of payments manual edition 5 (BPM5). 
4) 
Annual average of the Tribor rate – interbank rate for overnight loans. 
5) 
Average weighted rate applied on new 12-month loans over the respective month, on 
12-month maturity. 
6) 
Deposit interest rate represents the average weighted rate for newly accepted deposits 
over the respective month, on 12-month maturity. 
7) 
2013 and 2014: including persons who have not or could not be classified to a 
particular activity. 
8) 
2006: administrative data. 
9) 
Public sector. 
10) 
Excluding rice. 
 
 
