===== PAGE 1 =====
 
EN 
 
 EN 
 
 
EUROPEAN 
COMMISSION 
Brussels, 29.5.2019  
SWD(2019) 216 final 
 
COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT 
Kosovo* 2019 Report 
Accompanying the document 
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the 
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions 
2019 Communication on EU Enlargement Policy 
{COM(2019) 260 final} 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* 
This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244/1999 and 
the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence 
 


===== PAGE 2 =====
 
1 
 
Table of Contents 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
3 
1.1.  
Context 
3 
1.2 
Summary of the Report 
3 
2. 
FUNDAMENTALS FIRST: POLITICAL CRITERIA AND THE RULE OF LAW 5 
2.1 
Functioning of democratic institutions and public administration reform 
5 
2.1.1 
Democracy 
5 
2.1.2 
Public administration reform 
10 
2.2 
Rule of law and fundamental rights 
14 
2.2.1 
Judiciary and fundamental rights 
14 
2.2.2 
Justice, freedom and security 
32 
3.  
FUNDAMENTALS FIRST: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND 
COMPETITIVENESS 
44 
3.1. 
The existence of a functioning market economy 
44 
3.2. 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union 49 
4. 
GOOD NEIGHBOURLY RELATIONS AND REGIONAL COOPERATION 
52 
5. 
NORMALISATION OF RELATIONS BETWEEN KOSOVO AND SERBIA 
54 
6. 
EUROPEAN STANDARDS 
55 
6.1 
Free movement of goods 
55 
6.2 
Movement of persons, services and right of establishment 
57 
6.3 
Free movement of capital 
58 
6.4. 
Financial services 
59 
6.5. 
Customs 
60 
6.6 
Taxation 
61 
6.7 
Competition 
62 
6.8 
Public Procurement 
63 
6.9 
Company law 
65 
6.10 
Intellectual property law 
65 
6.11 
Social policy and employment 
66 
6.12 
Consumer and health protection 
69 
6.13 
Education and culture 
71 
6.14 
Science and research 
73 
6.15 
Trade issues 
73 
6.16 
Enterprise and industrial policy 
74 
6.17 
Agriculture 
75 
6.18 
Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy 
76 


===== PAGE 3 =====
 
2 
 
6.19 
Fisheries 
77 
6.20 
Environment and climate change 
78 
6.21 
Transport policy 
80 
6.22 
Energy 
81 
6.23 
Trans-European networks 
83 
6.24 
Information society and media 
84 
6.25 
Financial control 
85 
6.26 
Statistics 
87 
ANNEX I – RELATIONS BETWEEN THE EU AND KOSOVO 
90 
ANNEX II – STATISTICAL ANNEX 
92 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 4 =====
 
3 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION  
1.1.  
Context  
The EU-Kosovo Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) has been in force since 
April 2016. The European Reform Agenda (ERA), launched by the EU and Kosovo in 
November 2016, has continued to serve as a useful tool to guide the implementation of EU 
related reforms in the SAA context.  
In July 2018, the Commission confirmed that Kosovo has fulfilled all visa liberalisation 
benchmarks endorsed by the Council. In March 2019, the European Parliament supported the 
Commission’s proposal for visa liberalisation in its first reading. The proposal is pending in 
the Council and should be treated as a matter of urgency.  
The overall domestic political context proved challenging during the reporting period. In 
November 2018, the Kosovo government imposed a 100% tariff on imports from Serbia and 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, on political and economic grounds. This economically counter-
productive measure violates the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) and is not 
in the spirit of the SAA. It has undermined successful regional cooperation efforts, notably the 
creation of a regional economic area (REA), and must be revoked.   
1.2 
Summary of the Report1  
As concerns the political criteria, Kosovo made progress in the implementation of certain 
key EU-related reforms, in particular as regards the improvement of the legal framework in 
the areas of rule of law and public administration. However, a number of measures and ad hoc 
decisions were not in line with the government’s stated reform objectives. The excessive size 
of the government, including further increases in the number of deputy ministers, has 
continued to affect its credibility and effectiveness. 
The Assembly was able to build majorities on some key strategic issues for Kosovo, as 
demonstrated by the ratification of the border/boundary demarcation agreement with 
Montenegro and the adoption of important EU-related legislative reforms. However, the 
Assembly continued to operate in a highly polarised political context, and weaknesses in its 
overall functioning remained, as demonstrated notably by the frequent lack of quorum, 
resulting in delays in the legislative activity. 
There has been limited progress in addressing the EU election observation mission findings 
and recommendations regarding parliamentary and municipal elections held in 2017.  
The situation in the north of Kosovo remains particularly challenging. 
There is some level of preparation in the area of public administration reform. During the 
reporting period, some progress was made overall, however serious efforts are needed to 
tackle the political influence on recruitment of senior civil servants. There was good progress 
with the adoption of the package of laws on the functioning and organisation of public 
administration, on public officials and on salaries. Other achievements include the adoption of 
guidelines on strategic planning and the start of the implementation of the action plan on the 
rationalisation of agencies. The revised legal framework is an important step towards creating 
a modern and professional civil service and improving accountability. While the Law on 
Salaries introduces a more transparent and equal salary system for public officials, its 
medium-term budgetary impact raises concerns.  
                                                          
1 This report covers the period from March 2018 to March 2019. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from the government of Kosovo, the EU Member States, European Parliament reports 
and information from various international and non-governmental organisations.  


===== PAGE 5 =====
 
4 
 
Kosovo's judicial system is at an early stage. Some progress has been achieved as the Law on 
the Disciplinary Liability of Judges and Prosecutors and the Law on Mediation were adopted, 
and the roll out of an electronic case management system has advanced. The number of 
judicial staff in both prosecution offices and courts increased in 2018, including in the Special 
Prosecution Office. While the integration into the judicial system of Kosovo Serb judges, 
prosecutors and their support staff was formally concluded in 2017, more work is needed to 
ensure full functionality, in particular regarding the Court of Appeals. The judiciary is still 
vulnerable to undue political influence. The administration of justice remains slow and 
inefficient and rule of law institutions need sustained efforts to build up their capacities.  
Kosovo is at an early stage/has some level of preparation in the fight against corruption. 
Kosovo has made some progress through significant legislative reforms in the rule of law area 
and in investigating and prosecuting of high-level cases. Progress was also made on 
preliminary confiscation of assets although final confiscations remain low. Corruption is 
widespread and remains an issue of concern.  
Kosovo is at an early stage in the fight against organised crime. Some progress was made 
notably through significant legislative reforms in the rule of law area, in investigating and 
prosecuting high-level cases and on the preliminary freezing of assets. However, little 
progress was made on final confiscation of assets and there are still few financial 
investigations and final convictions. Measures are needed to strictly ensure there is no 
political interference with operational activities of law enforcement bodies and the 
prosecution. The situation in the north of Kosovo with regards to organised crime continues to 
pose challenges for law enforcement agencies.  
Progress was made in the fight against terrorism, especially with regard to creating better 
conditions for rehabilitation and reintegration of foreign terrorist fighters and their families. 
The Kosovo authorities need to be more effective in their efforts to fight money laundering 
and the relevant law should be brought in line with EU acquis and international standards. 
The legal framework broadly guarantees the protection of human and fundamental rights in 
line with European standards. However, the implementation of human rights legislation and 
strategies is often undermined by inadequate financial and other resources, particularly at 
local level, limited political prioritisation and lack of coordination. The existing mechanisms 
for coordination and implementation of human rights are ineffective. The large dependence on 
foreign donors remains. More needs to be done to effectively guarantee the rights of persons 
belonging to minorities, including Roma and Ashkali2 and displaced persons, to ensure gender 
equality in practice, to set up an integrated child protection system and to advance the 
protection of cultural heritage. Kosovo has some level of preparation regarding freedom of 
expression, which is enshrined in the Constitution. Kosovo benefits from a pluralistic and 
lively media environment. Rule of law institutions increasingly follow up on threats and 
attacks against journalists and there is a decrease in the number of incidents. A sustainable 
solution for the funding of the public broadcaster remains to be adopted. The broadcaster 
remains vulnerable to political pressure and influence. 
As regards the economic criteria, Kosovo is at an early stage and has made some progress in 
developing a functioning market economy. Economic growth was robust but the very 
challenging labour market situation remains a concern. The government adhered to the fiscal 
rules, but spending pressures relating to social benefits for specific groups of the population 
and public employees’ wages pose risks to public finances and hinder private sector 
                                                          
2 In line with the terminology of European institutions, the umbrella term ‘Roma’ is used here to refer to a 
number of different groups, without denying the specificities of these groups. 


===== PAGE 6 =====
 
5 
 
development. The business environment improved somewhat, but persistent challenges 
remain, including the widespread informal economy, a slow and inefficient judiciary, high 
prevalence of corruption and overall weak rule of law institutions. Despite strong growth of 
services exports, economic diversification has advanced slowly. 
Kosovo is at an early stage and has made some progress regarding its capacity to cope with 
competitive pressure and market forces in the EU. Kosovo made some progress in improving 
roads, but there are large gaps in the railway and energy infrastructure. Little progress was 
made in securing a stable energy supply and losses in the electricity sector remain very high. 
Kosovo made some progress as regards the digitalisation of the economy. Little progress was 
made on improving the quality of education and addressing skills gaps in the labour market. 
Structural changes are emerging only slowly and the economy remains highly reliant on the 
domestic trade sector. Export growth is driven mainly by service exports to the diaspora, 
while the lack of product diversification hinders the growth of goods exports.  
As regards good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation, Kosovo continued to 
participate in most regional fora. However, Kosovo’s decision to impose a 100% tariff on 
imports from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina has undermined regional cooperation 
efforts. 
Regarding the normalisation of relations with Serbia, Kosovo has remained engaged in the 
dialogue. However, the Kosovo government needs to revoke the tariffs on imports from 
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Kosovo needs to make further substantial efforts to 
establish a conducive environment to the conclusion of a legally binding agreement with 
Serbia. Such an agreement is urgent and crucial so that Kosovo and Serbia can advance on 
their respective European paths. 
As regards alignment with European standards, Kosovo has some level of preparation. 
Legislative alignment has continued in some areas but implementation is weak. Some 
progress was made in the area of free movement of goods, services and capital, as well as on 
financial services, public procurement and competition. Good progress was made in the areas 
of statistics and financial control. In the area of taxation and customs, some progress was 
made in collecting tax revenues, reducing the grey economy, or enforcing customs measures 
for the protection of intellectual property rights, however Kosovo should step up the fight 
against the informal economy and tax evasion. Some progress has been achieved to address 
environmental issues, but implementation is lagging behind. The energy sector continues to 
face serious challenges, despite some progress especially on energy efficiency. Overall, 
Kosovo needs to improve its administrative capacity and coordination, across all sectors, to 
ensure effective implementation of the acquis.  
Authorities have made progress in managing regular and irregular migration. These efforts 
should be continued and built on. In this context, Kosovo needs to put in place a return 
mechanism for irregular migrants in line with EU standards and practices.  
2. 
FUNDAMENTALS FIRST: POLITICAL CRITERIA AND THE RULE OF LAW  
2.1 
Functioning of democratic institutions and public administration reform 
2.1.1 Democracy 
Domestic politics in Kosovo remained highly polarised during the reporting period. The 
Assembly was more active on EU-related legislation, but weaknesses remained in its overall 
functioning. Kosovo made substantive progress on certain key EU-related reforms, for 
instance as regards improving the legal framework in the areas of the rule of law and public 
administration. However, the authorities took a number of decisions that are not in line with 
the government’s stated reform objectives.  


===== PAGE 7 =====
 
6 
 
Elections 
Kosovo's electoral framework needs to be strengthened by effectively addressing 
long-standing weaknesses throughout the electoral cycle. Most of the recommendations made 
following the EU electoral observation missions in 2014 and 2017 have still not been 
addressed. The revised legal framework on political party and campaign finances needs to be 
in line with Venice Commission recommendations.  
Following early parliamentary and regular mayoral and municipal elections in 2017, little 
progress has been made in strengthening the electoral process, in line with the 
recommendations of the EU electoral observation missions (EOMs). Allegations of 
intimidation in Kosovo Serb municipalities during the 2017 elections have not been 
adequately addressed or investigated.  
Long-standing weaknesses include the lack of effective oversight and enforcement of political 
party and campaign finance, underrepresentation of women in political party structures and 
elected office, deficient electoral dispute mechanisms, voter list inaccuracies and a largely 
defective voting scheme for residents abroad. Kosovo institutions need to take action to 
address these challenges, in line with the EOM recommendations and in close collaboration 
with partners. The joint initiative taken by the Kosovo Assembly caucus leaders in April 2019 
to improve and strengthen the electoral process, and the decision of the Assembly to establish 
an ad hoc parliamentary committee on this matter, involving local and international experts 
and stakeholders, are welcome steps. Reforms of party and campaign financing, based on a 
legal opinion of the Venice Commission, are currently under consideration in the Assembly. 
The Venice Commission recommendations need to be reflected in any revised legislation.  
The Central Election Commission (CEC) members, except the CEC president, have not been 
appointed between March 2018 and March 2019. In March 2019, the President finally 
appointed eight out of the ten members, enabling the CEC to reach quorum, but 
disagreements between political parties persist on their representation in the CEC. This 
situation should be resolved as soon as possible. The CEC, and in particular its Political Party 
Registration and Certification Office, needs to strengthen its capacities significantly to ensure 
the effective enforcement of rules governing political party and campaign finances.  
In November 2018, the mayors of the four Serb-majority municipalities in the north of 
Kosovo resigned in reaction to the government’s decision to impose a 100% tariff on imports 
from Serbia. Subsequently, extraordinary mayoral elections took place in those municipalities 
on 19 May 2019, in a calm atmosphere. In a context of restricted electoral competition, 
Srpska Lista was the only Kosovo Serb party to participate. Its candidates won in the four 
municipalities with over 90%. 
Parliament  
The Assembly continued to operate in a highly polarised political context. Together with 
continuing weaknesses relating to the rules of procedure and planning of sessions, this led to 
delays in legislative activity. Nevertheless, the Assembly was able to build majorities on 
certain key strategic issues for Kosovo, such as the ratification of the border/boundary 
demarcation agreement with Montenegro and the adoption of several major EU-related 
legislative reforms.  
During the reporting period, the proper functioning of the Assembly was hampered by a 
polarised political context. The frequent absence of Assembly members, including partial 
boycotts, often resulted in a failure to achieve a quorum for decision-making and thus 
significant delays in legislative activity. In spite of this, the Assembly adopted a series of key 


===== PAGE 8 =====
 
7 
 
legislative EU-related reforms, notably on the rule of law and public administration. Likewise, 
it ratified several important international agreements, including the border/boundary 
demarcation agreement with Montenegro (March 2018), the Transport Community Treaty 
(October 2018) and agreements on Kosovo’s participation in three EU programmes 
(Erasmus+, Citizens for Europe and Creative Europe) in September 2018. 
Frequent violations of the Assembly rules of procedure persisted, exacerbating political 
tensions between the governing coalition and the opposition. Furthermore, a number of 
plenary sessions have not been concluded, resulting in a large backlog of agenda items. The 
Assembly needs to return to regular plenary sessions and respect the timing of the scheduled 
sessions, in line with the rules of procedure. In addition, it needs to improve its regulatory 
framework, including its rules of procedure. Out of the 91 laws adopted during the reporting 
period, only two were adopted by fast-track procedure. However, overall there is still a lack of 
substantive debate or stakeholder consultation on draft laws. 
The reporting period saw changes in the political configuration of the Assembly. In March 
2018, Srpska Lista parliamentarians withdrew their support for the governing coalition, 
resulting in the government losing its parliamentary majority. In May 2018, a new Social 
Democratic Party (PSD) caucus was created by 12 parliamentarians who were formerly in the 
Vetëvendosje caucus.  
Kosovo has a mandatory quota of 30% of Assembly seats reserved for women. In the current 
legislature, 38 of the 120 Assembly members are women, including two of the five 
Vice-Presidents.  
Parliamentary oversight of the executive remains weak. Ministers often failed to report to the 
Assembly and the government often failed to answer parliamentary questions in a timely 
manner. Parliamentary committees continued consultations with relevant stakeholders, but 
improvements are required as regards early notification and follow-up. The Assembly 
administration needs to build up specialist expertise to lend more effective support to 
parliamentarians and Assembly committees.  
The Assembly and the government should implement the recommendations following the 
review of the independent agencies, which was carried out to rationalise the number of 
agencies reporting to the Assembly (See section 2.1.2 – Public administration reform). These 
agencies do not report systematically to parliamentary committees. The current system does 
not ensure effective oversight of these agencies and undermines their independence from 
undue political or commercial influence. The Assembly failed to appoint professional board 
members for several independent institutions in a timely manner or on the basis of merit. It 
should make better use of the annual report of the Office of the Auditor-General to 
scrutinise government work. The Assembly’s Committee of Oversight of Public Finances, 
which prepares recommendations for adoption by the Assembly, should also hold hearings of 
ministers. The parliamentary oversight of the Kosovo Security Forces and the Kosovo 
Intelligence Agency continues to be insufficient. 
The Ombudsperson Institution of Kosovo continued to advance its mandate in promoting, 
protecting and upholding fundamental rights and freedoms for all and to strengthen its 
capacity to review cases. It remains the most trusted institution in Kosovo. Institutions’ 
implementation of the Ombudsperson’s recommendations has improved. Political parties’ 
finances and campaign funding and expenditure continue to lack transparency and the 
relevant legislation, inter alia on legal limits and the transparency of donations, contributions 
and expenditure, remains largely unenforced. This undermines public trust in political parties 
and continues to expose the democratic process to significant risks of corruption and undue 
influence. A draft revised Law on the financing of political entities, prepared by the 


===== PAGE 9 =====
 
8 
 
government after consultation of the Venice Commission, is under consideration in the 
Assembly. The recommendations of the Venice Commission should be taken into account so 
as to ensure transparency, accountability and effective enforcement mechanisms. During the 
reporting period, the CEC and the competent law enforcement and judicial authorities failed 
to follow up the findings of external auditors from December 2017 confirming serious 
violations of the political party financing legislation and severe weaknesses in internal 
financial control by political entities. The CEC’s Office for Political Parties Registration and 
Certification needs to be strengthened and given operational independence to ensure proper 
implementation of the legislative framework, including through better cooperation with the 
prosecution, tax authorities, the Anti-Corruption Agency and the Auditor-General. 
Governance 
The government demonstrated commitment to implementing some key European Reform 
Agenda (ERA) priorities, in particular on legislative reforms in the areas of the rule of law 
and public administration. However, at the same time it took a number of decisions that are 
either not in line or not in the spirit of Kosovo’s reform obligations. The number of ministers, 
including deputy ministers, remains excessive. The government’s overall achievements were 
overshadowed by its imposition of 100% tariffs on goods from Serbia and Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. 
Important progress was made with the implementation of key commitments under the ERA, 
including legislative reforms in the areas of the rule of law and public administration reform. 
However, a number of ERA commitments have not been fully implemented yet, in particular 
in the areas of competitiveness, employment and education.  
Moreover, a number of measures taken by the government over the reporting period were not 
in line with its states reform objectives, notably non-merit based recruitments and ad hoc 
decisions influenced by special interests.  
The appointment as government advisor and then nomination as ambassador of a convicted 
war criminal was widely criticised. Moreover, the fact that the government includes a number 
of ministers who have been indicted for offences involving corruption and abuse of office is 
damaging for the government’s image and its stated commitment to fight corruption and 
impunity at all levels.  
The trend of appointing excessive numbers of deputy ministers, sometimes without clear 
attributions of roles, continued. There are currently around 80 deputy ministers. This 
continues to undermine the government’s credibility, coherence and effectiveness.  
Kosovo’s updated 2018-22 programme for the implementation of the SAA serves as the main 
tool for planning, coordinating and monitoring EU-related reforms. Implementation of the 
SAA is proceeding, but much of the programme is lagging behind. A stronger focus on SAA 
implementation will be needed to ensure that Kosovo meets its contractual obligations and 
deadlines under the Agreement. 
The Ministerial Council for European Integration (led by the Prime Minister) and the 
Working Committee for European Integration (led by the Minister for European Integration) 
meet at regular intervals to provide strategic guidance on EU-related reforms. The role of the 
Ministry of European Integration is crucial in ensuring effective coordination of and a 
strategic approach to EU-related reforms. 
In the reporting period, a number of personnel changes took place in government. Of 21 
ministers, 19 are men. Five ministerial posts continue to be held by minority representatives, 


===== PAGE 10 =====
 
9 
 
but the ministers belonging to Srpska Lista do not participate in government meetings and 
decision-making.  
Efforts to improve the capacity and service delivery of local government have continued. 
However, the quality of public consultation at local level remains a concern. Women remain 
underrepresented in local decision-making positions. All 38 mayors of Kosovo municipalities 
are men. Of the 38 chairpersons of the municipal assemblies, 32 are men. However, efforts by 
the Ministry of Local Government Administration have led to some improvements. The 
proportion of director positions in municipal executive bodies held by women increased from 
11% to 19%. In 31 of the 38 municipalities, remunerated positions of municipal assembly 
committees include an equal number of women and men, as required by the Law on gender 
equality. The Ministry of Local Government Administration has referred the six non-
compliant municipalities to the Minister for Justice for legal action.   
While local municipalities have been given more powers, their human and financial resources 
are often insufficient. Limited capacity and difficulties in enforcing laws, regulations, 
policies, and procedures impair the quality of delivery of municipal services. Excessive 
political influence over the local administration, together with weak municipal assembly 
oversight and budgetary powers, has a negative impact on local governance. A new Law on 
local finances is being prepared, addressing issues relating inter alia to budget allocations, 
arrangements for capital investments at the local level, the financial sustainability of small 
municipalities and a specific grant earmarking funding for social services.  
Municipalities in the north of Kosovo complied with legislation on the adoption of the 2018 
municipal budgets. Inconsistencies in population figures persist and it is important that the 
municipalities participate in the next planned Kosovo-wide census.  
Civil society 
Further progress was made in improving cooperation between civil society and the central 
government. The adoption of a new Law on Freedom of Association in Non-Governmental 
Organizations (NGOs), in line with best international standards and practices, was an 
important step forward. The publication of a first government report on public funding of 
non-governmental organisations resulted in more transparency. More efforts are needed to 
ensure meaningful involvement and cooperation also at local level. Civil society monitoring 
of, advocacy for and close engagement in European reforms remains key to Kosovo’s 
progress on its European path.  
Kosovo’s civil society needs to continue, and be further enabled, to play an important role in 
the democratic debate and in the design and implementation of public policy.  
The Assembly finally adopted in April 2019 a new Law on Freedom of Association in 
Non-Governmental Organisations, which improves the legal protection of NGOs, in line with 
best international standards and practices. This law reversed contentious amendments adopted 
by the Assembly in November 2018.  
In October 2018, a sectoral risk assessment for money laundering and anti-terrorism in the 
NGO sector was concluded by Kosovo’s Financial Intelligence Unit, in consultation with a 
number of civil society organisations.  
With some delay, a new 2019-22 strategy for structured cooperation between the Kosovo 
government and civil society is being prepared. The new strategic priorities aim to broaden 
participation in community-based NGOs and secure the sustainability of the organisations.  
Public consultations by the government are improving, including through an increased use of 
online public consultation. For the first time, an annual report on the government’s public 


===== PAGE 11 =====
 
10 
 
consultations was produced in May 2018. However, some public bodies still have limited 
capacities to implement their legal consultation obligations. Institutions should step up their 
efforts to provide more consistent and meaningful feedback to input received and to broaden 
the consultation tools used to reach a wider audience in effective ways. There is ongoing work 
to introduce public consultation standards also at municipal level. 
There is still a need for systematic transparency in the disbursement of public funds to NGOs. 
While several ministries and municipalities have, for the first time, conducted open calls in 
accordance with legal requirements, too many ministries and municipalities still lack the 
capacity to fulfil new requirements. The publication of an annual government report on public 
funding is a good practice, but the report needs to be more detailed. Further efforts are needed 
to address the risks of conflicts of interest and strengthen professionalism and integrity within 
evaluation commissions deciding on grants to NGOs. The legal framework for tax deductions 
for donations remains ambiguous. 
2.1.2 Public administration reform 
Kosovo has achieved some level of preparation in the reform of its public administration. 
Some progress was made overall, while there was good progress with the adoption of the 
package of laws on the functioning and organisation of public administration, on public 
officials and on salaries. Also, the government adopted guidance on strategic planning, and 
started implementing the action plan on the rationalisation of agencies. While the new Law on 
Salaries introduces a more transparent salary system for public officials, its medium-term 
budgetary impact raises concerns. The government needs to ensure efficient implementation 
of the new legislation. A new regulation on the procedures for recruitment to senior 
management positions in the civil service was introduced. However, political influence on 
recruitments to senior civil service positions and non-merit-based recruitments remain issues 
of serious concern. Ad hoc policy-making, in many cases influenced by special interests, is an 
obstacle for inclusive and evidence-based policy-making. Delays in the adoption of special 
laws in line with the Law on General Administrative Procedures continue to cause legal 
uncertainty for citizens and businesses, hence the Commission’s recommendation from 2018 
on this issue remains valid. Overall, weak central and inter-ministerial coordination hampers 
the implementation of these cross-cutting reforms.   
In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular: 
 adopt all necessary secondary legislation and start effectively implementing the laws on 
public officials, salaries and the organisation and functioning of the public administration; 
 increase accountability in the public sector by implementing the action plan on the 
rationalisation of agencies and creating a clear framework for managerial accountability 
and the delegation of responsibilities in public institutions;  
 align contradictory special laws with the Law on General Administrative Procedures and 
address the current backlog of administrative court cases; 
 ensure full respect for merit-based recruitment and dismissal of public officials, especially 
senior management. 
Strategic framework for public administration reform 
Kosovo is implementing the three public administration reform strategies and the public 
financial management reform strategy for 2016-2020, supported by a number of more 
specific reform strategies. Implementation has experienced delays, due to the cross-cutting 
nature of the reforms and weaknesses in inter-ministerial coordination. The action plans have 
been revised to take greater account of the public administration capacities. The government 


===== PAGE 12 =====
 
11 
 
has continued to monitor implementation of the strategies and has published annual 
monitoring reports, which provide the basis for policy dialogue. However, an integrated 
monitoring and reporting framework for all related reforms has yet to be established. Civil 
society has participated actively in monitoring the government’s reform efforts.  
While public administration reform has enjoyed political support and the continuity provided 
by the Minister for Public Administration has been crucial, parallel political processes have 
undermined some of the reform efforts. The reform monitoring reports are neither actively 
discussed nor followed up at political level. Also, the Ministry of Finance still needs to 
become more involved in the overall coordination of reforms, especially because of the 
increased focus on managerial accountability (See section 6.25 – Financial control). 
Financial sustainability remains a concern, as reform measures rely heavily on the support 
of external donors. The annual budget allocations and provisions in the medium-term 
expenditure framework remain lower than planned in the strategies.  
Policy development and coordination 
The policy-making system, including for EU-related reforms, is in place, but there are 
weaknesses. The government has started to address them by adopting a new administrative 
instruction on strategy planning, development and monitoring in April 2018 and issuing 
practical guidance in January 2019. These unified requirements aim to improve the quality of 
sector strategies and address overlaps, over-ambitious planning and poor financial planning as 
well as ensure regular monitoring and reporting. The Prime Minister’s Office has now to 
ensure a strong quality control and monitoring function to follow up on implementation.  
Some aspects of inclusive and evidence-based policy and legislative development are in 
place. Regulatory and budgetary impact assessments and EU acquis alignment opinions, 
though formally required for draft laws, are not systematically reflected in adopted 
government decisions. Ad hoc policy-making, in many cases influenced by special interests, 
seriously hampers inclusive and evidence-based policy-making. Administrative data 
collection and its systematic use for policy-making needs to improve substantially across the 
administration.  Public consultations are organised more regularly, thanks to the minimum 
standards for such consultations. In 2018, more than 50% of all primary policy documents and 
draft laws were published for consultation on the web portal; this represents a substantial 
increase since 2017. As the response rate from civil society and the public remains relatively 
low, the government is making efforts to promote the use of the web-portal. 
Public scrutiny of government work is expected to improve with the new requirement of 
line institutions to publish annual monitoring reports on the implementation of their strategy 
documents. Also, in line with the action plan in the open data readiness assessment, the 
government should make more datasets available on its open data platform. Civil society 
should be more systematically involved in the design, monitoring and evaluation of 
government plans and programmes. Parliamentary scrutiny of the government remains 
inadequate (See section 2.1.1 – Democracy). 
Public financial management 
The public financial management (PFM) reform strategy underwent a mid-term review in 
2018, but this did not give rise to new priorities. The four pillars (fiscal discipline, allocation 
efficiency, operational efficiency and cross-cutting issues) and 12 priorities remain the same, 
but some activities and indicators were adjusted to current priorities. The strategy is 
complemented by the 2017-2021 National Public Procurement Strategy, adopted in January 
2017, and the 2015-2019 Public Internal Financial Control Strategy (PIFC), adopted in 2015.  


===== PAGE 13 =====
 
12 
 
The fiscal ceilings on debt-to-GDP ratio, the fiscal deficit, the public sector wage bill and the 
bank balance were all observed over the reporting period. However, concerns about fiscal 
discipline have grown and the annual budget still lacks a degree of credibility. For example, 
there was considerable overspending on certain budget lines (such as social expenses). 
Payment arrears also remain problematic. Revenues in 2018 increased slightly compared to 
2017. The government budget deficit (under the fiscal rule definition) stood at 1.0% of GDP 
in 2018, compared to 0.9% in 2017. By the end of 2018, the public debt stood at 17.1% of 
GDP, slightly higher than in 2017. The government’s investment planning and management 
capacity needs to be further strengthened. 
To enhance budget transparency, the Ministry of Finance launched a new ‘transparency 
portal’ that contains budgetary information regarding central and municipal-level institutions 
in a more user-friendly and computer readable format. In addition, the government continues 
to publish the citizen-friendly budget. However, the available IT systems in the Ministry of 
Finance and related bodies need to be looked at further to ensure that they provide better 
integrated real-time information on public revenue and expenditure.   
Public service and human resource management 
The legal framework for the merit-based recruitment, promotion and dismissal, and the 
remuneration of civil servants has improved following the adoption of a Law on Public 
Officials and a Law on Salaries in February 2019. For the first time, different categories of 
public officials are clearly defined and a coherent and transparent salary system is set out in 
law. However, the fiscal impact of the new Law on Salaries is a concern that needs to be 
addressed (See section 3 – Economic development and competitiveness). The government 
needs to now adopt the necessary secondary legislation and ensure efficient implementation 
of the new legislation across the administration.  
Kosovo adopted a new regulation regulating the procedures for recruitment of senior civil 
servants. However, political influence over appointments and dismissals, especially for senior 
management, has continued to be a serious concern, and should be addressed under the new 
Law on Public Officials. In the reporting period, several recruitment processes for senior 
positions in ministries and agencies raised concerns as they did not respect the principles of 
transparent and merit based recruitment. Non-majority communities remain underrepresented 
in central public institutions. Women remain severely underrepresented in senior positions in 
the civil service. The Independent Civil Service Oversight Board, the autonomous appeals 
body tasked with ensuring compliance with applicable civil service legislation, has acquired 
additional powers through legal amendments passed by the Assembly.  
The Ministry of Public Administration, notably by establishing  the Department for the 
Management of Public Officials, needs to further enhance its own institutional capacities for 
central coordination of human resources management in Kosovo administration. Also, line 
institutions’ human resources management units need to be enhanced before the new public 
administration laws enter into force. A human resource management information system is 
established, but not all modules are operational and interoperability with the payroll system is 
not yet established.  
The professional development of civil servants continues to be an issue, as the Kosovo 
Institute for Public Administration does not have the budget and capacity to provide the 
requisite training. Performance appraisals continue to have little impact on career 
development. 
While measures such as integrity plans are in place to promote integrity in the public 
service, they are not systematically implemented across the administration. A new Law on 


===== PAGE 14 =====
 
13 
 
Conflict of Interest was adopted in April 2018. Whistle-blower protection has also been 
strengthened through a new law adopted in November 2018. Annual reports are now 
published on disciplinary measures against civil servants. The Assembly adopted legislative 
amendments that enable the removal of the public officials convicted for corruption-related 
criminal offences (See section on the fight against corruption). 
Accountability of the administration 
Kosovo has demonstrated commitment for more effective lines of accountability. Following 
the letter of commitment signed by the Prime Minister and the Speaker of the Assembly in 
March 2018, the government adopted an action plan on the rationalisation of agencies in June 
2018 and has started to implement it. Progress has been made on the first phase of the 
rationalisation of agencies. A new Law on the Organisation and Functioning of Public 
Administration and Independent Agencies was adopted in February 2019. It introduces a 
typology of executive agencies and regulatory bodies, and clarifies organisational, 
administrative, budgetary and decision-making autonomy, and supervision requirements for 
such bodies. However, Kosovo should make considerable further efforts to implement 
managerial accountability and to delegate decision-making responsibilities in the public 
administration (see section 6.25 – Financial control). 
The independent oversight institutions, especially the Ombudsperson and the Kosovo 
National Audit Office, continue to address the citizens’ right to good administration. The 
government should ensure more efficient follow-up to implementation of their 
recommendations. The draft Law on Access to Public Documents should be adopted to ensure 
the right to access public information. Kosovo should increase judicial capacity to 
strengthen the citizens’ right to administrative justice. The Basic Court in Pristina has 
continued to accumulate a backlog of administrative cases, especially since the new Law on 
Minor Offences came into effect in January 2017. The backlog increased from 1,390 cases in 
2017 to 1,511 in 2018. The liability of public authorities in cases of wrongdoing and the right 
to seek compensation are affected by fragmented legislation. No data are collected to 
monitor implementation. 
Service delivery to citizens and businesses 
While the government promotes a user-oriented administration, there are weaknesses in the 
leadership, policy directions and coordination of the overall reform process. Many institutions 
continue to implement their own solutions alongside the central electronic identification (eID) 
tools that are being developed. Collection of citizens’ and businesses’ feedback on the quality 
of service delivery still needs to be systematically developed. An interoperability platform 
exists and is now functional but the quality of registered data needs to improve for the 
platform to be useful. While legislation on equal access to services is in place, it is not 
systematically applied. 
Kosovo has made some progress on the simplification of administrative procedures since 
the entry into force of the Law on General Administrative Procedures in June 2017. An 
inventory of laws with special administrative procedures now exists, but only limited progress 
has been made on aligning the sector laws with the new law. Considerable efforts are needed 
to inform and educate the administration and the general public on obligations and rights 
under the new law. Training courses for officials have started. Kosovo should also focus on 
developing a clear policy on digitalisation of administrative services.  


===== PAGE 15 =====
 
14 
 
2.2 
Rule of law and fundamental rights 
2.2.1 Judiciary and fundamental rights 
Kosovo is at an early stage in/has some level of preparation for applying the acquis and the 
European standards in this area. Some progress has been made, including in the investigation 
and prosecution of some high-level corruption cases. However, corruption is widespread and 
remains an issue of concern. The adoption of several pieces of legislation that are important 
for the functioning of the judiciary and the fight against corruption marked a significant step 
forward and these now require robust implementation. As regards fundamental rights, 
implementation of the relevant laws and strategies continues to be undermined by inadequate 
financial and other resources, and a lack of political prioritisation and coordination.   
Functioning of the judiciary 
Kosovo is at an early stage in developing a well-functioning judicial system. Some progress 
was achieved in 2018. As regards last year’s recommendations, the Law on the disciplinary 
liability of judges and prosecutors and the Law on mediation were adopted and the roll-out of 
an electronic case-management system has advanced. However, the process of amending the 
2015 justice package (laws on the Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils and Courts), which 
started in 2017, has slowed down implementation of the 2015 laws. The number of judicial 
staff both in prosecution offices and in the courts increased in 2018, including in the Special 
Prosecution Office. While the integration into the judicial system of Kosovo Serb judges, 
prosecutors and their support staff was formally concluded in 2017, more work is needed to 
ensure full functionality, in particular regarding the Court of Appeals. With outstanding 
appointments finally made, the Constitutional Court is now fully constituted. Two ministerial 
initiatives aimed at improving various aspects of the judiciary (a functional review and the 
Justice 2020 agenda) are under way. There were cases of political interference in the 
judiciary, notably regarding a war veterans’ pension scheme case. The administration of 
justice remains slow and inefficient, and rule of law institutions need sustained efforts to build 
up their capacities. 
In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular: 
 continue to strengthen the capacity of judges, prosecutors and support staff, and improve 
the court administration, in particular through an electronic case-management system 
consistently used in all courts and prosecution offices that should also perform random 
allocation of cases and provide reliable statistical data, in line with the European 
Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ) methodology; 
 implement the new Law on the disciplinary liability of judges and prosecutors to 
strengthen accountability;  
 step up efforts to reduce the backlog of cases, including by using alternative dispute 
resolution tools and in particular mediation, the use of which should be properly financed 
and promoted. 
Strategic documents 
Overall, there is slow progress in implementing the 2014-2019 strategic plan of the Kosovo 
Judicial Council (KJC), its 2014-2019 communication strategy and the strategy for reducing 
the backlog of cases, an open-ended document adopted in 2013. The Kosovo Judicial Council 
and the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council (KPC) adopted annual plans setting out priorities for 
the Councils, courts and prosecution offices for 2018. Although the Prosecutorial Council 
progressed in the implementation of its strategic plan for 2016-2018, this was lagging behind. 


===== PAGE 16 =====
 
15 
 
Kosovo lacks a comprehensive strategy for justice sector reforms and a proper mechanism for 
inter-institutional coordination. There is insufficient coordination of donors by the Kosovo 
authorities. This leads to inefficiencies, incoherence and duplication of effort. The functional 
review of the rule of law sector is due to be finalised in September 2019 and should produce 
inter alia a rule of law sector strategy. In September 2018, the Ministry of Justice, in 
coordination with the Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils, launched the Justice 2020 agenda, 
detailing a number of concrete steps to improve the functioning of the judiciary in the short 
term.  
Management bodies 
The Kosovo Judicial Council and the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council are responsible for 
ensuring the independence and impartiality of the judiciary. Their composition and 
appointment procedures are broadly in line with European standards. 
The Law on the Kosovo Judicial Council was amended to align with constitutional 
amendments in 2016 whereby the majority of its members are to be elected by their peers. 
The Council now needs to be fully constituted. It took steps to implement the new Laws on 
the Judicial Council, on courts and on the disciplinary liability of judges and prosecutors 
immediately after their adoption. The budget allocated to the Judicial and Prosecutorial 
Councils was further increased in the reporting period. The court statistics are still not easily 
accessible by the public and not reliable.   
The formal process of integrating Kosovo Serb judges and prosecutors into the judicial system 
was concluded in 2017. Ensuring access to judicial proceedings in the Albanian and Serbian 
languages across Kosovo and the use of both languages in the work of the judicial bodies 
remains a challenge due to a lack of qualified translators. Laws are often poorly translated. 
In August 2018, the President appointed five judges to the Constitutional Court, which now 
has a full complement of nine judges. 
Independence and impartiality 
The Regulation on internal organisation of courts provides for random allocation of cases. 
There are some concerns that it is not being consistently applied. High-profile and sensitive 
cases are not always processed in a timely manner. 
Legal safeguards on independence and impartiality are enshrined in the Constitution and the 
legal framework. Judges cannot be transferred without their consent. The Councils should 
react more efficiently and actively in cases of alleged political interference in the judiciary 
such as with respect to the war veterans’ pension scheme. The judiciary needs to be shielded 
effectively from undue pressure, political or otherwise.  
The Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils are responsible for taking protective measures to 
secure the safety of judges and prosecutors. The technical aspects of protection are dealt with 
by the police. In the reporting period, three prosecutors were granted close protection due to 
threats they received for cases they were investigating.  
Accountability 
Codes of ethics are in place for judges, prosecutors and attorneys, but their effective 
implementation remains weak. The Prosecutorial Council adopted a new code of ethics in 
December 2018. The Judicial Council has made it mandatory for all judges to attend training 
on judicial ethics each year. In 2018, 88% of all judges received this training. Disciplinary 
procedures are in place, but they are subject to long delays and have proven inefficient. A 
new Law on the disciplinary liability of judges and prosecutors adopted in November 2018 


===== PAGE 17 =====
 
16 
 
provides for more robust and clear disciplinary mechanisms with rigorous deadlines and clear 
division of powers and responsibilities. The President may dismiss judges and prosecutors on 
a proposal from the Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils for a number of criminal and 
disciplinary offences. They are entitled to appeal.  
In 2018, the Office of the Disciplinary Counsel submitted two cases against judges and seven 
cases against prosecutors to the Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils. The Councils imposed a 
number of disciplinary measures, but there were no dismissals.   
Judges and prosecutors are obliged by law to declare their assets and gifts received, and to 
report any possible conflict of interest to the Anti-Corruption Agency. In 2018, with the 
exception of one prosecutor, they all submitted their assets declarations on time. 
Professionalism and competence 
The President appoints judges and prosecutors for an initial three-year term, following a 
proposal from the Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils respectively. So far, the President has 
followed all proposals. The Councils organise recruitment processes and entry exams for 
judges and prosecutors on the basis of merit-based criteria. In 2018, the Judicial Council 
recruited 37 new Basic Court judges (18 women, 19 men), including 7 from non-majority 
communities. The recruitment process was conducted in accordance with the existing legal 
framework. The Council needs to ensure that evaluation and verification have a clear legal 
basis and do not interfere in judges’ private lives.  
Merit-based performance criteria and an evaluation system are in place. The Councils are 
required to carry out performance evaluations for prosecutors and judges with a permanent 
mandate every three years. In 2018, the Prosecutorial Council evaluated 67 prosecutors and 
the Judicial Council 118 judges. The results of the evaluation (94% of prosecutors and 100% 
of judges with permanent mandates were rated ‘good’ or ‘very good’, and none ‘insufficient’) 
are in stark contrast to the public perception of prosecutors’ and judges’ performance. The 
level of professionalism and competence, especially of prosecutors, is still a matter of 
concern; some are inadequately trained and some are unwilling to apply the training received 
and to take full responsibility for their cases. A system has yet to be implemented whereby 
judges and prosecutors undergo effective and systematic evaluation based on clear criteria, 
with the results influencing their career progression. 
Quality of justice 
The Academy of Justice is responsible for delivering initial and in-service training for judges 
and prosecutors and their legal and administrative staff. The training is based on the annual 
training curricula jointly prepared by the Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils and the 
Academy following a comprehensive needs assessment. The Academy also provided a 
training programme for the Kosovo Serb judges and prosecutors who joined the judicial 
system in October 2017. Judges and prosecutors undergo an initial 12-month training 
programme following their appointment. The budget allocated to the Academy increased by 
more than 20% from 2017 to 2018. In-service training remains necessary, in particular in 
specialised areas such as economic crime, confiscation and public procurement, the new 
provisions of the revised Criminal Code (including on domestic violence and sexual 
harassment), and European Court of Human Rights case-law. Judicial education needs to play 
a more prominent role in the evaluation process. 
Measures to ensure the consistency of jurisprudence need to be further strengthened. The 
new Law on courts aims to increase transparency by making it obligatory for all courts to 
publish their judgments on their websites within 60 days. A webportal is being set-up to make 
them all easily accessible and searchable. The Academy of Justice maintains a database 


===== PAGE 18 =====
 
17 
 
accessible to all judges and prosecutors; this includes applicable legislation, commentaries 
and other legal material.  
Following the appointment of 37 judges in January 2019, there are 431 judges (140 women 
and 291 men) and 191 prosecutors (77 women and 114 men), with 24 judges and 10.6 
prosecutors per 100 000 inhabitants. According to the Council of Europe’s European 
Commission for the efficiency of justice (CEPEJ), the European average is 21 judges/11 
prosecutors per 100 000 inhabitants. Kosovo has a low percentage of female judges and 
prosecutors in comparison to most other European countries. 
The overall initially approved 2018 budget for the judiciary (including prosecution, courts, 
the Academy of Justice and the Correctional and Probation Service) was EUR 48.9 million 
in 2018 (up from EUR 46.4 million in 2017), or 2.35% of the general budget (2.32% in 2017). 
It was increased to EUR 54.7 million in the course of 2018.  
E-justice tools remain underdeveloped and new IT systems in the various justice sector 
institutions are developed in a fragmented manner, without any overall strategy or coordinated 
monitoring. There is a tracking mechanism for high-level corruption and organised crime 
cases; this currently includes 47 cases. An electronic case-management information system 
was rolled out for criminal cases in five of the seven Kosovo courts and the piloting phase for 
civil cases in one of the courts was completed. Continued commitment is needed to ensure the 
system’s systematic use and its timely implementation, including in Kosovo’s largest court 
and prosecution office in Pristina, as well as in Mitrovica, in particular to obtain automatically 
reliable statistical data about the performance of the judiciary. Work on a central criminal 
records registry continues as planned, but more commitment from the courts is needed to 
ensure sustainability.  
The mediation system has been operational since 2008. The new Law on mediation, which 
entered into force in September 2018, established a Chamber of Mediators and clearer, more 
robust mediation procedures. Of an initial seven regional mediation centres, only one is 
currently operational. However, seven mediation ‘points’ were established in basic courts and 
five in the basic prosecution offices. In 2018, 2,596 cases were solved by the 189 licensed 
mediators (67 women, 122 men), of whom 14 were from the Serb-majority municipalities.  
Public awareness of or familiarity with alternative dispute resolution tools remains low. 
However, several awareness-raising campaigns and training activities were conducted 
in 2018. The mediation system needs further strengthening through full implementation of the 
recently adopted Law and allocation of a sufficient budget.   
Efficiency 
Kosovo still needs to be more efficient in dealing with the backlog of cases. Courts face a 
high number of incoming criminal cases, most of which concern minor offences. The judicial 
system needs to ensure proper follow-up of all high-profile cases, including those handed over 
by the EU Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). 
The efficiency of the judiciary is seriously hampered by shortcomings in criminal legislation. 
The Criminal Code and the Criminal Procedure Code were substantially revised in 2018 to 
address these issues. The Assembly adopted the revised Criminal Code in November 2018, 
but has yet to adopt the new Criminal Procedure Code. The low capacity and commitment of 
some judges to manage court proceedings, sanction the parties causing delays and ensure the 
presence of all parties at sessions lead to numerous postponements of hearings and 
unreasonably protracted criminal proceedings. These aspects and the Appellate Court’s 
tendency to send cases for retrial to the basic courts contribute to a lengthy average 
disposition time (i.e. the average time taken from filing indictment to a judgment). These 


===== PAGE 19 =====
 
18 
 
delays in proceedings, in combination with a preference for detention over other restrictive 
measures, have led to cases of overly long detention. By far the highest number of complaints 
received by the Ombudsperson Institution in the reporting period concerned delays in judicial 
proceedings. Kosovo should consider introducing an effective judicial legal remedy to address 
delays in court proceedings, including compensation. 
The organisation of courts and resource allocation rests with the court presidents and heads of 
prosecution offices. Where necessary, judges and prosecutors can be temporarily transferred.  
There is a need to improve strategic planning, which also requires more efforts to introduce 
reliable statistical systems for the judiciary based on CEPEJ standard indicators. The number 
of legal staff directly assisting judges and prosecutors is insufficient. The budget allocated for 
2019 is insufficient to meet the requirements of the April 2018 Law on the state prosecutor 
and the November 2018 Law on courts to support every prosecutor/judge with one 
professional associate. The Prosecutorial and Judicial Councils plan to reach this target within 
three years. Once implemented, these provisions have the potential to improve significantly 
the efficiency of the system.  
The reform of the enforcement system, with which Kosovo passed in 2014 from court 
enforcement to a combined system of private enforcement agents and courts, has been 
generally successful. The introduction of private enforcement agents has shortened procedures 
and raised the overall level of debt collection. The court run enforcement system still faces a 
considerable backlog. It needs to be ensured that enforcement agents have easy access to 
public registers pertaining to their work.  
Domestic handling of war crime cases  
The war crimes department in the Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo continues its work, 
but challenges persist. Its workload has continued to increase significantly due to the end of 
the criminal executive mandate of EULEX and handover of EULEX cases to local 
prosecutors. There is an acute need for more training, more staff and more translation 
capacity. Although the number of prosecutors in the department has increased from two to 
three, this remains too few to handle the workload. Mutual legal cooperation between Kosovo 
and Serbia is extremely limited in war crimes cases. 
Significant concerns remain about the willingness to investigate, prosecute, judge and 
effectively enforce convictions in war crimes cases involving former Kosovo Liberation 
Army members. These concerns were further substantiated by the Kosovo judges’ handling of 
the Drenica 1 and 2 war crimes cases following the handover of the majority on the benches 
in these cases from EULEX to local judges. Both cases were characterised by the use of 
highly contested procedures, with one being sent for re-trial and most of the defendants 
released. The Prime Minister appointed, as his political advisor, a convicted war criminal who 
had just been released from prison after serving two thirds of his sentence in the Drenica 1 
case and while he was awaiting the retrial of Drenica 2. On a positive note, the Kosovo 
Prosecutorial Council finally adopted the Strategy on War Crimes in February 2019.  
The Kosovo Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor's Office, established to investigate 
and prosecute allegations stemming from the 2011 Council of Europe Report, which alleges 
serious violations of international law, continued their work. 
As from February 2018, victims can apply to the Government Commission on Recognition 
and Verification of the Status of Survivors of Sexual Violence during the Conflict for 
recognition and verification to receive individual benefits. By March 2019, close to 1,000 
individuals had submitted applications, of which 301 have been accepted and 147 rejected.  
The timeframe of the relevant law excludes those who suffered conflict-related sexual 


===== PAGE 20 =====
 
19 
 
violence after 20 June 1999. Often, in addition to problems regarding access to justice, 
survivors of sexual violence also face societal stigma. 
In April 2018, the President initiated the establishment of a Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission and appointed a preparatory team. The authorities need to develop a 
comprehensive approach to dealing with the past, linking the work on the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission with the government’s commitment to developing a strategy on 
dealing with the past and other transitional justice initiatives. These processes need to be 
locally and nationally owned, as well as inclusive and gender- and victim-sensitive. Kosovo 
maintained its engagement in the Coalition for the Commission Tasked with Establishing the 
Facts about All Victims of War Crimes and Other Serious Human Rights Violations 
Committed on the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia (RECOM). 
Fight against corruption 
Kosovo is at an early stage/has some level of preparation in the fight against corruption. In 
the reporting period, some progress was made through significant legislative reforms in the 
area of the rule of law, including the Criminal Code, on the investigation and prosecution of 
high-level cases and on the preliminary freezing of assets. Final confiscations of assets remain 
low. 
Kosovo has partly followed the recommendations of the 2018 report, namely on the track 
record, the training and hiring of prosecutors, and on the adoption of legislative reforms. 
However, some of the recommendations remain valid, while others require robust follow-up 
in terms of their implementation. Overall, corruption is widespread and remains an issue of 
concern. There is a need for strong political will to effectively address corruption issues, as 
well as a robust criminal justice response to high-level corruption.  
In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular: 
 further increase the number of prosecutors in the Special Prosecution Office investigating 
and prosecuting high-level corruption cases and provide training to strengthen their 
capacity to conduct financial investigations, confiscate assets and effectively protect 
witnesses; 
 prioritise the thorough implementation of the revised legislative framework in the area of 
the rule of law, including through training and awareness-raising, to make it an effective 
tool to combat corruption;  
 ensure that the financial reports and campaign disclosure reports of political parties are 
consistently published and audited, and sanctions applied for violations of relevant laws. 
Amend the legal framework governing political party and campaign financing in line with 
the opinion of the Venice Commission, to ensure effective enforcement, accountability 
and transparency; 
 ensure the adoption of the revised Criminal Procedure Code, including provisions on the 
suspension of public officials indicted for corruption. 
Track record 
As regards the work of the multidisciplinary team established in 2015 to coordinate efforts to 
deal with high-level corruption cases and high-profile serious and organised crime, the 
track record now amounts to a total of 51 cases. There have been 38 indictments so far, 27 
related to corruption and 11 related to organised crime. In 9 cases, there has been a final 
ruling, with 5 ending in a (partially) guilty verdict, leading to 9 individuals being convicted of 
corruption-related offences (e.g. conflict of interest, trading in influence, abuse of official 


===== PAGE 21 =====
 
20 
 
position or authority). Assets worth approximately EUR 13.2 million have been frozen in 
these cases, with no assets finally confiscated. In July 2018, the European Commission 
confirmed that Kosovo had met the benchmark in its visa liberalisation roadmap to strengthen 
the track record in the fight against organised crime and corruption. These efforts should 
continue and the Commission will continue actively to monitor the further development of the 
track record. 
The standard operating procedure regarding the track record cases should be revised in order 
to ensure that all high-level corruption and organised crime cases are covered by the Joint 
Team for the Selection and Targeting of Serious Crimes (beyond the cases prioritised for the 
visa liberalisation benchmark) in a comprehensive and overall track record.  
The situation in the north of Kosovo with regard to corruption continues to pose particular 
challenges for law enforcement agencies.  
Preliminary asset confiscations have increased, but final confiscations have dropped 
significantly. In 2018, the total value of assets preliminarily confiscated was slightly over 
EUR 28 million (compared to EUR 10.9 million in 2017), while the value of finally 
confiscated assets amounted to only EUR 49 394, as compared to EUR 700 000 in 2017. 
Proper implementation of the new legislation related to asset confiscation should lead to a 
significant increase in these numbers. 
Since it was set up, the Anti-Corruption Agency has sent more than 700 cases to the 
prosecution, including more than 90 referrals in 2018. Of the 80 referrals in 2017, the 
prosecution has filed indictments in 8 cases, of which 4 are now on trial. The reports that the 
Agency submits to the prosecution need to be of better quality and the prosecution needs to 
improve its capacity and show more willingness to pursue cases related to corruption.  
In 2018, 385 new cases of criminal offences against official duty involving 753 individuals 
were reported. There were 6 new cases related to corruption in public procurement and 421 
new cases related to economic crimes. Overall, 325 allegations of corruption were received 
in 2018 and indictments were filed against 335 individuals. The courts found 79 individuals 
guilty.   
98% of the 4,737 officials obliged to submit annual declarations of assets have done so in 
time in 2018 (only 86, less than 2%, failed to do so); out of 4819 officials obliged to submit 
them in 2019, 98.5% did so (only 64, less than 1.5%, failed to do so). The Agency has more 
than 100 cases under investigation for false declarations of assets. It still lacks tools and 
resources to verify asset declarations. These checks would require closer cooperation and the 
exchange of data with the police, the tax administration, the Financial Intelligence Unit, the 
land registry and municipal authorities. The establishment of an e-declaration system would 
simplify filing and monitoring, increase transparency and decrease human errors. The 
Anti-Corruption Agency has been proactive in ensuring that public officials from the north of 
Kosovo meet their obligations regarding the submission of asset declarations.  
In 2018, the Agency handled more than 100 cases of conflict of interest, of which fewer 
than 5 were submitted for the minor offences procedure and 10 were sent to the prosecution 
service for criminal investigation, which solved 5 cases in the reporting period. In more than 
30 cases, a conflict of interest was avoided.  
The transparency and accountability of funding for political parties and campaign 
financing need to be strengthened. Reports of political parties’ finances are still not 
consistently and fully published and the campaigns for the 2017 parliamentary and local 
elections have yet to be subjected to an external audit of campaign funding and expenditure. 
While independent audits of the political parties’ finances from 2013 to 2016 were previously 


===== PAGE 22 =====
 
21 
 
carried out with significant delay, the audits for 2017 have yet to take place, with the selection 
of the auditors only being finalised at the start of 2019. The Central Election Commission 
(CEC) and other competent authorities, including the prosecution, should clarify their 
respective competencies, investigate potential cases and ensure that audit reports are followed 
up in line with the provisions and sanctions of the law. Political parties should submit their 
financial reports by the legal deadline, which should then be audited properly and in due time. 
By the end of the reporting period, the CEC had sanctioned only one political party for a 
delay in submitting its annual financial report. 
Action plans have been developed following the assessments carried out previously to 
determine the risk of corruption due to weaknesses in the legal/institutional set-up in the 
health, education, energy and mining sectors, and in the public procurement, judicial and 
prosecution systems. Steps need to be taken to implement these action plans and effectively 
address corruption in these particularly prone sectors. There is still no policy to prevent 
corruption in the private sector.  
Institutional framework 
The anti-corruption institutions in Kosovo are not well integrated, their remits overlap and the 
division of tasks needs to be clarified. Kosovo needs to strengthen inter-institutional 
coordination mechanisms and bodies, and ensure that the institutions have access to the 
relevant databases.  
Prevention measures 
The main body for prevention remains the independent and specialised Anti-Corruption 
Agency. It is tasked with conducting administrative investigations, checking asset 
declarations, monitoring conflicts of interest and public procurement activities, and improving 
awareness. Other bodies with inspecting and auditing powers are the Auditor-General, the tax 
authorities, the customs authorities and the Financial Intelligence Unit.   
Training must be provided for staff of the main anti-corruption bodies, especially on risk 
assessments. The Academy of Justice integrated an anti-corruption programme as part of its 
training curriculum, including training on prevention measures. There is a need to promote 
integrity in the public service as a tool to prevent corruption and ensure discipline. The 
Anti-Corruption Agency has worked on the design of integrity plans for five municipalities, 
along with international partners, on a voluntary basis.  
Law enforcement 
Kosovo has specialised institutions for fighting corruption: the National Coordinator against 
Economic Crime, the Anti-Corruption Coordinator appointed by the Chief State Prosecutor 
and the Police Directorate for the Investigation of Economic Crimes and Corruption, which 
maintains anti-corruption units at police stations and headquarters. Each basic prosecution 
office has an anti-corruption prosecutor, and two prosecutors are appointed by the head of the 
Special Prosecution Office to handle high-level corruption cases. The serious crime 
departments of the Kosovo Basic Courts have so far dealt with all corruption cases. Following 
the adoption of the new Law on courts in December 2018, special departments in the Basic 
Court of Pristina and the Court of Appeals will handle all cases of the Special Prosecution 
Office including corruption cases. 
Investigations and indictments need to be of higher quality, and the presentation of cases 
before the courts needs to improve. The Special Prosecution Office does not have enough 
specialised staff with the required level of training and competence to deal with financial 
cases, including procurement cases. Joint, multidisciplinary in-service training on economic 


===== PAGE 23 =====
 
22 
 
crimes and corruption for police, prosecutors and judges remains necessary. The number of 
specialised prosecutors must be increased further, also in light of the handover of EULEX 
cases to local prosecutors. In order to facilitate this process, the amended Law on the State 
Prosecutor was adopted and entered into force in April 2018. Since then, 5 prosecutors were 
recruited to the Special Prosecution Office, bringing the total to 15 out of a planned number 
of 18.  
Financial investigations are still not systematically launched in cases of corruption and 
organised crime. Kosovo needs to apply the concept of financial investigation in line with 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) standards (See section on organised crime). The police, 
prosecutors and judges need continued specialised training on the confiscation of assets and 
money laundering. The Academy of Justice conducted seven specialised training courses for 
judges and prosecutors, focusing on public procurement and combating corruption, money 
laundering and cybercrime. However, the courses were badly attended. 
Legal framework  
Criminal law provisions on corruption are generally in line with relevant European standards. 
Kosovo is not a party to most international anti-corruption conventions, including the United 
Nations Convention against Corruption, due to status-related issues. However, it has made 
substantial efforts to align its legislation with these instruments. 
The newly adopted Criminal Code amended several corruption-related provisions, including 
on corruption in the private sector. The Criminal Procedure Code was also substantially 
revised, and is under consideration in the Assembly. The codes include provisions requiring 
the suspension and removal of public officials respectively indicted for and convicted of 
corruption. The new Law on extended powers of confiscation constitutes a substantial 
improvement in the fight against corruption. It provides for simple and robust tools to 
confiscate assets, including those of which the origin cannot be explained (see section on the 
fight against organised crime). This law must now be implemented to bring results. In 
addition, the Law on the prevention of money laundering clearly stipulates that the predicate 
offence does not have to be proven to retain a conviction on money laundering before an asset 
can be confiscated. Prosecutors and judges should implement this in full. 
The Law on the prevention of conflicts of interest was revised and adopted by the 
Assembly in April 2018 and should be fully implemented. Several high-level public officials 
still occupy two or more posts, in direct contravention of the Law’s provisions. The Law on 
State Prosecutor, which facilitated an increase in the number of prosecutors in the Special 
Prosecution, was also revised and brought more into line with European standards.  
At Kosovo’s request, the Venice Commission issued an Opinion on the draft Law amending 
and supplementing the Law on the financing of political entities in June 2018. The review 
of the current legislation should take account of the recommendations of the Venice 
Commission and aim to ensure transparency, accountability and effective enforcement, 
including clearly defined sanctions.  
Kosovo should also implement measures allowing the effective investigation of inexplicable 
wealth. There is still no efficient system in place for the declaration, origin and control of 
the property of senior public officials and the declaration, origin and control of gifts for 
all official persons. The amendments to the relevant legislation, together with the amendment 
to the Law on the Anti-Corruption Agency, should be drafted and finalised in order to give the 
Agency more robust powers to verify asset declarations and make the declaration system 
more effective in tackling graft. Kosovo has no specific legislation on lobbying. A new Law 
on the protection of whistle-blowers, adopted in November 2018, brings the legal framework 


===== PAGE 24 =====
 
23 
 
more into line with international standards. It will have to be aligned with the new EU acquis 
on this issue. Strengthened whistle-blowing mechanisms and protection requirements now 
need to be utilised in practice. 
Kosovo will need to ensure proper budgeting, training and awareness-raising to effectively 
implement and enforce this revised legal framework.  
Strategic framework 
The Anti-Corruption Strategy and Action Plan for 2018-22 were drafted after a 
consultation process and adopted by the government in March 2018, but they were not sent to 
the Assembly until October 2018 and have not yet been approved. Its implementation had 
been hampered by inadequate financing and a lack of measurable impact indicators. The 
government still needs to demonstrate genuine leadership, the ability to practise advance 
planning and a willingness to allocate adequate resources to the fight against corruption. A 
monitoring mechanism should be established to assess regularly the impact of the new 
Strategy and Action Plan. 
Fundamental rights 
The legal framework broadly guarantees the protection of human and fundamental rights in 
line with European standards. However, additional efforts are needed to enforce it. 
Implementation of human rights legislation and strategies is often undermined by inadequate 
financial and other resources (particularly at local level), limited political prioritisation and 
lack of coordination. The existing mechanisms for the coordination and implementation of 
human rights are ineffective. The heavy dependence on foreign donors remains.  
As regards last year’s recommendations, the Inter-Ministerial Coordination Group for Human 
Rights met twice in 2018, but its effectiveness remains questionable. A 2019-23 Strategy on 
Children’s Rights was approved in January 2019. On cultural rights, after nearly two years of 
inactivity, the Implementation and Monitoring Council met regularly in 2018.  
Much more needs to be done to address the recommendations of the 2018 report, which 
remain valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular: 
 reassess and strengthen the efficiency and effectiveness of the mechanisms for the 
coordination and implementation of human rights, including the rights of persons 
belonging to minorities and displaced persons; 
 strengthen the implementation of the Law on gender equality, promote the representation 
of women in decision-making roles and advance the implementation of the strategy and 
action plan on protection against domestic violence; 
 adopt the draft Law on child protection and ensure that it is duly implemented, ensure the 
sustainable funding and proper accountability of relevant institutions and actors, and the 
integration of the child protection systems at central and local level; 
 advance the protection of cultural heritage by fully implementing and enforcing legislation 
on special protective zones and legislation addressing illegal construction. Adopt the Laws 
on cultural heritage and religious freedom and ensure the continued functioning of the 
Implementation and Monitoring Council;  
 ensure the solid implementation of the strategy and action plan for the inclusion of  Roma 
and Ashkali communities, including the allocated funding. 


===== PAGE 25 =====
 
24 
 
International human rights instruments form an integral part of Kosovo’s legal framework 
and are directly applicable, as provided for in the Constitution. Kosovo continued to align its 
legislation with these instruments and maintained its practice of ad hoc reporting.  
On the promotion and enforcement of human rights, effective implementation of human 
rights legislation and of the numerous human rights-related strategies remains a challenge. 
There is no real coordinating mechanism for the implementation of these strategies. The 
overall Kosovo Human Rights Strategy has not yet been finalised, even though the process 
started in 2013. The Advisory Office for Good Governance (eight staff) lacks the necessary 
resources and capacity to fulfil its broad mandate, which includes overseeing, coordinating 
and drawing up policies in the areas of good governance, human rights, equal opportunities 
and anti-discrimination issues; coordinating the involvement of civil society in policy and 
decision-making; and monitoring the implementation of strategic documents on corruption.  
The Inter-Ministerial Coordination Group for Human Rights rarely meets and neither takes 
decisions nor properly follows up on previous government commitments. As a result, there is 
no overall assessment of the human rights situation in Kosovo, no overall human rights policy 
and no coordination among stakeholders. Stronger political leadership is required to establish 
these. The role of the human rights officers in ministries and municipalities also needs to be 
strengthened. The Ombudsperson Institution acts as legal mechanism for the protection, 
supervision and promotion of fundamental rights and freedoms, as the National Preventive 
Mechanism against torture and as a mechanism of equality for promoting, monitoring and 
supporting equal treatment without discrimination. The Institution has further strengthened its 
capacity to review cases and continued its efforts to increase awareness on human rights 
issues. The positive trend in the implementation of its recommendations needs to be 
reinforced. In 2018, for the first time, the Assembly held a plenary session on the 
implementation of the Institution’s recommendations. Its independence is supported by the 
fact that the Law on Ombudsperson allows for a reduction of its budget in comparison to the 
previous year only with approval by the Ombudsperson. It has nearly 80 staff who work as 
part of an internal structure reflecting the competencies of the Institution. 
The arrest and subsequent forced deportation of six Turkish nationals legally residing in 
Kosovo in March 2018 raised serious concerns about the respect of due process. Following 
the operation, the Prime Minister demanded the resignation of the Minister of Internal Affairs 
and the head of the Kosovo Intelligence Agency. Since then, both the Ombudsperson 
Institution and the Kosovo Assembly investigation committee established to examine this 
issue have alleged multiple legal violations committed by Kosovo institutions. The Basic 
Court of Pristina has meanwhile annulled the initial decision revoking the residence permits 
(which was based on an alleged threat to national security) for three of the deportees.   
On the prevention of torture and ill treatment, the situation remains broadly satisfactory 
and the Kosovo authorities have shown a sustained commitment to prevent such practices in 
all circumstances. There have been some complaints about the incorrect treatment of prisoners 
by correctional staff. The team of the National Preventive Mechanism against Torture in the 
Ombudsperson Institution regularly visits, without prior notice, all places of deprivation of 
liberty in Kosovo. However, in March 2018, the team was denied access to premises and 
documentation at the Pristina airport to verify whether six arrested Turkish nationals were 
held there. Kosovo should further strengthen ongoing efforts to provide adequate medical and 
psychological support and rehabilitation to all victims of torture and other ill-treatment in 
Kosovo. There are ongoing efforts to address the recommendations issued by the European 
Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment 
(see prison system). 


===== PAGE 26 =====
 
25 
 
The prison system continues to comply with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the 
Treatment of Prisoners and European Prison Rules. Prison conditions vary widely among the 
different establishments of the Kosovo Correctional Service. Following the opening of a new 
detention centre in Pristina, more prisoners are now accommodated in adequate facilities. 
Plans to close old facilities have not yet materialised. Overcrowding is generally not a 
problem. There has been progress regarding general staffing levels in the Correctional Service 
and a number of senior positions have been filled. Meaningful activities for inmates such as 
work and other rehabilitative programmes remain rare. Progress has been made on the 
provision of healthcare in prisons, which has been fully transferred from the Ministry of 
Justice to the Ministry of Health. Progress can also be reported regarding the Prison 
Inspectorate, which has adopted a new working methodology based on the ‘Mandela rules’. 
Political pressure continued to affect decisions on the categorisation of prisoners. This 
allowed for preferential treatment of high-profile prisoners. The planned amendments to the 
Law on the execution of penal sanctions should not compromise the progress achieved with 
the previous amendments to prevent such preferential treatment. Alternative sanctions and 
measures are ordered mainly for juveniles (over 1,000 in 2018, see child rights). As regards 
adults, many judges and prosecutors are reluctant to impose alternative sanctions.  
The new Law on personal data protection was adopted in February 2019 with the aim to 
align the legal framework with the EU General Data Protection Regulation and Law 
Enforcement Directive. This constitutes significant progress in the area of data protection. 
Implementation of this Law should now follow, beginning with the appointment of the 
commissioner and issuing/updating the necessary secondary legislation.  A new Information 
and Privacy Agency will supervise the implementation of the legislation for personal data 
protection and access to public documents. The new Law on personal data protection provides 
for inspectors to carry out inspections on compliance. 
Legal provisions on the freedom of thought, conscience and religion are in place and 
religious leaders of all faiths continue to interact. However, the draft Law amending and 
supplementing the Law on religious freedom still needs to be adopted and incorporate the 
recommendations made by the Venice Commission. The Serbian Orthodox seminary in 
Prizren continues to function well. The May 2016 final judgment by the Constitutional Court 
on the land dispute case involving the Visoki Dečani monastery and Deçan/Dečane 
municipality, which confirmed the monastery’s legal ownership of the land, remains 
unimplemented.  Local resistance to the implementation of the judgement, including overt 
defiance by municipal officials, continues to raise concerns.  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Freedom of expression  
Kosovo has some level of preparation regarding freedom of expression, which is enshrined 
in the Constitution, and benefits from a pluralistic and lively media environment. There was 
limited progress in this area over the reporting period. The rule of law institutions have 
increased the follow-up to threats and attacks against journalists. The number of incidents has 
decreased. There are particular concerns regarding freedom of expression in the north of 
Kosovo, including self-censorship. In spite of some efforts by the Assembly, a sustainable 
solution for the funding of the public broadcaster remains to be adopted. The broadcaster 
remains vulnerable to political pressure and influence. The audio-visual sector in Kosovo is 
characterised by a lack of data and the existing legislation needs to be updated and 
implemented. There were no legislative developments on the regulation of media ownership 
and transparency.  
In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular:  


===== PAGE 27 =====
 
26 
 
 further improve the cooperation within and response of the responsible institutions to 
physical attacks against journalists, and other forms of pressure;  
 ensure sustainable funding for the public broadcaster in a manner which preserves its 
independence; 
 review the Law on the Independent Media Commission to update its competences, 
including regarding the online audio-visual media services covered by the 2010 
Audiovisual Media Services Directive;  
 increase the availability of data on the audio-visual market, in particular as regards media 
ownership.  
Intimidation of journalists  
The number of threats and attacks against journalists has decreased. According to the 
Association of Journalists of Kosovo, 16 incidents were reported in 2018, down from 24 
in 2017. There has been a more systematic response from rule of law authorities, with the help 
of coordinators in the police, prosecution and courts. However, 2018 saw only one indictment 
and three convictions regarding threats and attacks against journalists. Adjudication of cases 
remains generally slow.  
Legislative environment  
Freedom of expression and the media are constitutionally guaranteed and legislation on libel, 
hate speech and defamation is in line with European Court of Human Rights case-law. The 
Law on the Independent Media Commission led to the creation of an independent regulator 
and authorities have provided it with sufficient regulatory, monitoring and enforcement 
powers to ensure that internal and external media pluralism is safeguarded. However, such 
legislation does not cover media available online. The newly adopted whistle-blower 
legislation strengthens the protection of journalistic sources. The public’s right to reply and 
correction remains unregulated. The new Law on access to public documents has not yet been 
adopted.  
Implementation of legislation/institutions  
The effective implementation of legislation remains a key challenge for the Kosovo 
audio-visual sector. The Independent Media Commission (IMC) has not carried out any 
market analysis in the last years and lags behind in initiating cases and implementing fines for 
legal breaches. The government has not approved IMC’s draft strategy for the digital 
switchover. Newspapers and broadcasters who switched to the online world are no longer 
monitored. The Press Council follows the online press by reacting to complaints, but it does 
not have the necessary resources to carry out investigations or market analyses. The 
Independent Media Commission does not have the power to license and monitor audio-visual 
media services online (e.g. video on demand, catch-up TV and WebTV), which were already 
covered by the Audiovisual Media Services Directive adopted in 2010. Although this creates 
an unhindered environment for online media, it also undermines the privacy of individuals, 
leading to cases of alleged hate speech, libel and defamation. The right of access to public 
information is undermined by the authorities’ fragmented implementation of relevant 
legislation. The government should be more actively involved in policy development in the 
media sector. 
Public service broadcaster  
The Assembly has drafted a new Law on the public broadcaster, including a potential solution 
for sustainable funding for Radio Television of Kosovo (RTK). To date, the broadcaster 


===== PAGE 28 =====
 
27 
 
remains directly state-funded, with its budget determined annually by the Assembly. This 
undermines its independence, weakens its long-term sustainability and leaves it prone to 
political influence. Trade unions allege a lack of transparency in its recruitment procedures.  
Economic factors  
Media outlets are generally not economically sustainable. The lack of an audience 
measurement system and of a strong private advertising industry means that private 
broadcasters depend on other sources of funding and few are able to operate without strong 
links to political and business interest groups.  
A lack of data is another big challenge for Kosovo: information on media ownership 
structures, in particular for online media, remains unclear and often fictitious, as most media 
do not provide information on their finances or real ownership.  There are no data on 
audiences or the distribution of advertising funds or funds provided to broadcasters by either 
central or local government. Consequently, there is neither transparency nor fair distribution 
of the sources of financing among the media outlets and no way of knowing whether they are 
concentrated in the hands of few people which could jeopardise freedom of expression.  
Professional organisations and working conditions  
Associations of journalists in Kosovo have been active in condemning incidents and threats 
against journalists. They have also increased their cooperation with the Kosovo Police and 
prosecution services on following up on these cases. However, their involvement in 
discussing legislative initiatives on media issues remains limited. Journalists’ associations 
remain largely divided along ethnic lines and are considered weak. Journalists often work 
without contracts, which makes them vulnerable to corruption and prone to self-censorship. 
(See also Chapter 10 - Information society and media) 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Freedom of assembly and association is guaranteed by the Constitution and people in 
Kosovo have been making use of their rights by demonstrating and protesting against the 
government at different levels. Individuals and legal entities have the right to establish an 
association without having to register it, but most organisations decide to register in order to 
secure legal personality.   
Issues of labour and trade union rights are further covered in Chapter 19 - Social policy 
and employment. 
On property rights, the legislative and institutional framework governing the resolution of 
conflict-related property claims is adequate overall, but further improvement is needed in 
certain critical areas to ensure that property rights are fully realised. Despite the allocation of 
funds for the compensation scheme, no owners of former socially owned residential property 
affected by the conflict have been compensated yet. Another challenging issue is the illegal 
re-occupation of properties, as the Kosovo Property Comparison and Verification Agency has 
no authority to act on re-occupation following a second eviction. The government has adopted 
an amending law to allow the Agency to carry out multiple evictions and it is awaiting 
adoption by the Assembly. There are also concerns about fraudulent property transactions and 
illegal transfers of ownership of properties mainly belonging to displaced persons. 
Constitutional Court decisions on property cases must be fully observed and swiftly 
implemented. On a positive note, the Law on property taxes was adopted; it stipulates that 
those whose property has been illegally possessed are exempt from taxes accrued during the 
period of illegal possession. Some progress has been made on the issue of 350,000 
constructions built without a permit, through amendments to the Law on the treatment of 


===== PAGE 29 =====
 
28 
 
constructions without permit. The proof of ownership required by the amended Law should 
help to protect the property rights of displaced persons. When it comes to large-scale informal 
settlements, there is a continued lack of political will to address the issue. Women’s property 
rights have been strengthened in the new Laws on inheritance, family and notary, adopted in 
November 2018, and the measure for the registration of real estate on behalf of two spouses 
free of charge was extended until April 2019. However, overall women continue to face real 
challenges as regards property ownership and inheritance. They own less than 20% of 
properties.  
On non-discrimination, the Law on protection from discrimination is broadly in line with 
European and international standards, but implementation is limited. Although it establishes a 
general framework for preventing and combating discrimination, both rule of law institutions 
and victims have difficulties in identifying the situations in which its provisions can be 
applied. As very few cases are brought to court, there is as yet no case-law on the use of the 
anti-discrimination legislation. There is insufficient data on hate crimes which prevents the 
police and prosecution from effectively preventing and responding to these offences. It is 
necessary to establish an efficient hate crime data recording and collection system, enabling 
the recognition and registration of hate crimes. The tracking mechanism of the Prosecutorial 
Council still needs to be extended to cover cases of all forms of discrimination, not only those 
based on ethnicity. Of the 855 cases opened for investigation by the Ombudsperson due to 
complaints filed by citizens, 98 related to discrimination. 
Kosovo’s legal framework for equality between women and men is broadly in line with 
international standards. However, women often face gender-based violence and various forms 
of discrimination. Women are still severely underrepresented in decision-making in both the 
central government and the municipalities. There have been some improvements at municipal 
level (See section 2.1.1 – Democracy). Affirmative measures, though provided for in law, are 
rarely used in the process of recruitment at any level of the administration. The roles of the 
Agency for Gender Equality and of gender equality officers in ministries and municipalities in 
policy-making need to be strengthened. The effective implementation of the Law on gender 
equality is lagging behind. Completion of secondary legislation aimed at institutionalising 
gender-responsive budgeting is still pending. Breakdowns of data by gender are lacking and 
the mainstreaming of gender in laws and policies is not systematic. The Kosovo Programme 
for Gender Equality has not yet been adopted.  
There have been increased efforts to implement the 2016-2020 strategy and action plan on 
protection against domestic violence since the appointment of the National Coordinator in 
January 2018. These need to be sustained and lead to tangible results. Coordination 
mechanisms for protection from domestic violence have been established in seven 
municipalities. Domestic violence and sexual harassment have been introduced as stand-alone 
offences in the new Criminal Code. An integrated database for cases of domestic violence was 
launched in December 2018. The Ministries of Justice and Social Welfare, the Judicial and 
Prosecutorial Councils and the police signed a memorandum of understanding aimed at 
achieving full institutional coordination to feed the database and apply and enforce the 
legislation on domestic and other gender-based violence. There are concerns about lenient 
sentencing in cases of gender-based violence. Sustainable funding for shelters for victims of 
gender-based violence and trafficking in human beings has still not been ensured. Measures 
need to be taken for the effective reintegration of victims.  
On the rights of the child, Kosovo’s legal framework is largely in line with international 
standards, but implementation remains limited. The draft Law on child protection, which 
would consolidate numerous laws regulating actors and defining policies for children, is still 
awaiting adoption by the Assembly. Authorities must ensure that the Law is followed up with 


===== PAGE 30 =====
 
29 
 
an adequate budget and institutional ownership. A lack of funding for social services and 
monitoring hinders the minimum provision of quality services for the protection of children. 
The government approved the 2019-2023 Strategy on Children’s Rights in January 2019. A 
child and maternal indicators framework was also recently developed to monitor the situation 
of children’s rights. Child labour continues to be a concern and inspectorates and other 
competent authorities are unable to provide adequate services for the prevention and 
elimination of child labour and to address the issue of children living and working in the 
streets. A systemic solution and an institutional response to child begging and child marriage 
among Roma and Ashkali children is still lacking. The education management information 
system has been strengthened with the integration of a violence case registry module and 
early warning system in 30 municipalities, which contributes to the implementation of the 
protocol for the prevention and referral of violence in schools and prevention of dropout from 
school. Overall, however, efforts to prevent all forms of violence against children remain 
insufficient and the current legal framework does not explicitly prohibit corporal punishment. 
The draft Law adopted by the government would change that. Kosovo does not host children 
in large residential institutions, but has managed to develop alternative forms of protection for 
children without parental care. The subsidies for family housing for children without parental 
care and with disabilities were increased in 2018 by 33% to 66%. There is a lack of services 
and programmes for the prevention and reintegration of child victims of drug abuse. Kosovo 
has continued to make progress on juvenile justice, including the adoption of amendments to 
the Juvenile Justice Code in October 2018, which reduced pre-trial detentions for juveniles in 
conflict with the law from 12 to a maximum of six months. The new Code has increased the 
number of available diversity measures for juveniles. Kosovo has strong implementation of 
alternative measures for convicted minors.  
Little progress has been made on the rights of persons with disabilities and their integration 
in society remains a challenge due to limited support, inadequate health services and poor 
access to existing services. Physical access to public buildings, including schools, and 
transport remains limited for persons with disabilities. Inclusive planning and budgeting for 
appropriate interventions and service delivery should be pursued for both adults and children. 
The legal framework on mental health is also incomplete. Implementation of the Law on blind 
persons and the Law on the status of the rights of persons with paraplegia and tetraplegia is 
limited. The same applies for the 2013-2023 strategy on the rights of persons with disabilities. 
The National Disability Council should take a more proactive role to improve the wellbeing 
of persons with disabilities and promote their rights. Authorities should increase financial 
support to scale up community-based social and health services for children with disabilities 
and increase efforts to integrate them effectively into educational institutions. Girls face more 
challenges than boys as regards access to education. 
On the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons, the 
Constitution protects against discrimination based on sexual orientation. In addition, the 2015 
Law on anti-discrimination covers both sexual orientation and gender identity. The new 
Criminal Code broadens the legal protection of LGBTI persons including incorporating 
gender identity as a new aggravation of punishments and sexual orientation and gender 
identity as new basis for committing incitement to discord and intolerance. Further efforts are 
necessary to ensure the adequate implementation of the legislation, including through the 
LGBTI action plan. In October 2018, the second official LGBTI Pride parade was organised 
in Pristina and was more widely attended than in 2017. Although the population and public 
figures are becoming increasingly conscious of LGBTI rights, studies show that public 
awareness and acceptance of those rights remain low. A rise in hate speech was reported 
during the Pride Week. More efforts are needed to counter intolerance towards LGBTI 


===== PAGE 31 =====
 
30 
 
persons, as many remain at risk of discrimination and violence. In addition, there are no 
shelters for LGBTI victims of violence. Cases of hate crime against LGBTI persons are still 
not always properly investigated and brought to court. A legal framework for legal gender 
recognition should be developed. 
On procedural rights, those who are suspected or accused of committing a crime, and 
victims of crime have the right to solid protection under Kosovo law. They have the right to 
interpretation and translation, the right to information on their rights, the right to legal aid, and 
the right to communicate with family members, employers and consular authorities. Specific 
amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code should nevertheless be adopted to incorporate 
additional rights and guarantees to those suspected, those accused and victims of crime in 
order to comply fully with the relevant EU Directives. These amendments have nearly all 
been included in the revised draft Criminal Procedure Code adopted by the government and 
awaiting adoption in the Assembly. The legal aid provision is insufficient in practice to meet 
the obligations of the relevant Kosovo legislation and the requirements of the EU acquis and 
the European Convention on Human Rights and its jurisprudence. About a third of the cases 
investigated by the Ombudsperson in 2018 regard the right to a fair and impartial trial within 
a reasonable time. The Law on crime victim compensation is broadly aligned with the EU 
Directive on Compensation for Crime Victims. Authorities should ensure that they meet their 
obligations to inform victims of crime on all their rights, available protection and right to 
compensation. Victims’ advocacy officers must provide support to victims of crime in filing 
requests for compensation and should be trained accordingly. A crime victim compensation 
programme has been in place since 2016. In 2018, the Commission responsible for 
Compensation approved 7 requests and dismissed 14.  
Kosovo has an adequate institutional and legal framework for the rights and protection of 
minorities, including relevant strategies and action plans, but implementation remains weak. 
Greater coordination is needed at both central and local levels in support of minority 
communities. In order to promote a lasting inter-ethnic co-existence, the government needs to 
step up its efforts to create the conditions for minority communities fully to exercise their 
rights. They continue to face challenges regarding a secure environment, regaining and 
accessing property, civil registration, being able to use their own language, adequate 
provisions for education, employment opportunities and social welfare. 
The Office for Community Affairs under the Prime Minister’s Office focuses in practice on 
implementing projects for minority communities, while its actual mandate is much broader, 
including in-depth involvement in policy-making regarding communities’ rights and interests. 
The budget of the Consultative Council for Communities in the President’s Office was 
increased in the reporting period. More use should be made of the Council’s expertise when it 
comes to formulating policy. The technical working group set up to implement 
recommendations based on the Council of Europe’s Framework Convention for National 
Minorities met once in the reporting period. Implementation of the recommendations remains 
limited. 
The government has yet to approve the 2016 draft Strategy for the Promotion and Protection 
of Language Rights and the implementation of the Law on the use of language remains 
limited. Plans by the Prime Minister’s Office to establish a central translation cell to improve 
the quality and cost-effectiveness of translations have not yet materialised. Opportunities for 
learning a second official language as a subject remain practically non-existent in the 
education system, while extracurricular initiatives for language learning among students from 
different communities are still led predominantly by civil society organisations and 
international donors. The Language Commissioner was reappointed in January 2019 for 
another 6-year term. His office has the challenging mandate to protect and promote 


===== PAGE 32 =====
 
31 
 
community languages and to ensure the fair use of all languages in Kosovo while less and less 
people speak the language of one of the other communities.  
The overall security situation for minority communities remains stable. However, there are 
recurring incidents of property and livestock theft, which frequently affect Kosovo Serbs, as 
well as other minority communities. Such incidents, even when they are not clearly ethnically 
biased, negatively influence the security perceptions of the affected community. In addition, 
cases hindering freedom of movement have affected displaced Kosovo Serbs visiting religious 
sites. Security incidents have also affected non-Serb communities in the north of Kosovo. 
Increased follow-up by judicial authorities is required in order to bring the perpetrators of 
such incidents to justice. Relevant institutions should increase their efforts to record 
accurately and investigate all potential ethnically motivated incidents. Increased recruitment 
of minority police officers would contribute to an enhanced sense of security among the 
affected communities.   
Although the Law on the civil service requires that 10% of employees at central and 
municipal levels of government be members of non-majority community, their representation 
remains limited and generally confined to lower-level positions. This applies especially to 
smaller non-majority communities. 
The pace of return and reintegration of refugees and displaced persons continues to 
diminish, with 327 individuals returning in 2018. This is also due to the challenges they face 
in fully exercising their rights and lack of conditions for sustainable return (see also property 
rights and rights and protection of minorities). The Inter-Ministerial Commission for Return 
and Community Affairs, which should facilitate return and inter-community relations, did not 
convene in 2018. 
The situation of the Roma and Ashkali communities remains challenging and, in spite of 
efforts, they still suffer from marginalisation and discrimination, with women particularly 
affected. The poverty levels of these communities remain high compared to other 
communities in Kosovo. Implementation of the 2017-2021 strategy and action plan for the 
inclusion of the Roma and Ashkali communities in Kosovo society remains weak and policy 
interventions are not systematically evaluated. The coordination of government and donor 
assistance needs to be improved.  
Some improvements can be noted in the field of education. The enrolment rate at all levels is 
increasing, although it is still significantly below the average and many young Roma and 
Ashkali do not reach higher levels of education. The Ministry of Education, Science and 
Technology has increased the number of scholarships for Roma, Ashkali (and Egyptian) 
students from 500 to 600 in the current academic year and has allocated funds to the so far 
mainly donor-funded learning centres.  
In the absence of universal health coverage, Roma and Ashkali communities face particular 
difficulties to access health services due to their difficult socio-economic conditions. Only 
access to very basic services is free of charge. 
The housing needs of the Roma and Ashkali communities are met mainly through 
international donor funding. However, in 2018 the government allocated EUR 2.4 million for 
the construction of social housing for Roma, Ashkali and other vulnerable communities in 
selected municipalities. Additional efforts are needed to facilitate the labour market 
integration of members of the Roma and Ashkali communities. Kosovo has one of the highest 
rates of Roma informal work in the region. Access to employment services and vocational 
training provided by the Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare and other organisations is 
limited due to a lack of information. Government institutions should consider increasing the 


===== PAGE 33 =====
 
32 
 
number of employment counsellors from the Roma and Ashkali communities. Efforts need to 
be made to prevent child labour and child marriage, which affect girls in particular. Some 
people still face difficulties with civil documentation, often linked to return or repatriation. 
On cultural rights, work has started on a new Law on cultural heritage. Furthermore, after 
almost two years of inactivity, the Implementation and Monitoring Council met regularly 
in 2018. In March 2018, the government re-established the Council’s secretariat. The Ministry 
of Culture needs to continue to engage with the Serbian Orthodox Church on ways to support 
the reconstruction of its sites, which was left unfinished by the Reconstruction 
Implementation Commission. It needs to ensure that the Church can exercise full discretion in 
the management of its properties, while following legal procedures.  
Some violations were observed with respect to the implementation of the legal framework for 
special protective zones (SPZs). On 24 April 2018, the Ministry of Infrastructure officially 
inaugurated the Deçan/Dečane-Plav (Montenegro) road construction in the Visoki Dečani 
Monastery special protective zone. This triggered reactions from the international community 
in Kosovo and the Serbian Orthodox Church, and generated mistrust and suspicion on future 
road construction plans within the zone. The works were halted in May 2018 and the 
authorities gave reassurances that no further works would take place without prior 
consultation with all members of the Implementation and Monitoring Council.     
Continued vigilance is needed to safeguard the Prizren Historic Centre special protective 
zone. In June 2018, the Basic Prosecution office filed an indictment against the owner of a 
house that was demolished despite being listed as a protected monument. 
2.2.2 Justice, freedom and security 
Kosovo is at an early stage/has some level of preparation in this area. Some progress has 
been made, including in the fight against terrorism, violent extremism and radicalisation. The 
adoption of several laws important to the fight against organised crime marked a significant 
step forward. While more suspicious assets were identified and frozen, no progress was made 
in making financial investigations and the asset confiscation system more efficient and 
effective. The authorities continued to make progress in managing regular and irregular 
migration.  
Kosovo has partly followed the recommendations of the 2018 report, namely those related to 
violent extremism, the track record on the fight against organised crime, and 
confiscation-related legislation. Kosovo should continue to strengthen its track record and in 
the following year, it should in particular: 
 adopt standard operating procedures on conducting financial investigations and measures 
guaranteeing that financial investigations are automatically conducted when dealing with 
organised crime, terrorism, money-laundering and serious corruption cases;  
 ensure that all organised crime cases are covered by the Joint Team for Selection and 
Targeting of Serious Crimes; 
 continue implementing programmes on de-radicalisation, rehabilitation and reintegration, 
including through the full operationalisation of the Reintegration Division;  
 make the National Centre for Border Management fully operational, in order to strengthen 
inter-institutional and international cooperation and coordination in the field of migration. 
Fight against organised crime 
Kosovo is at an early stage in the fight against organised crime. Some progress was made, 
notably through significant legislative reforms in the area of the rule of law (including the 


===== PAGE 34 =====
 
33 
 
Criminal Code), on the investigation and prosecution of high-level cases and on the 
preliminary freezing of assets. Final confiscations of assets remain low. There are still few 
financial investigations and final convictions. Measures are needed to ensure there is strictly 
no political interference with operational activities of law enforcement bodies and the 
prosecution. The situation in the north of Kosovo with regard to organised crime continues to 
pose challenges for law enforcement agencies. Kosovo has partly followed the 
recommendations of the 2018 report, namely on the track record, training and hiring of 
prosecutors, the intelligence-led policing approach, and the adoption of legislative reforms. 
However, some of the recommendations remain valid, while others will now require robust 
implementation.  
In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular:  
 prioritise the thorough implementation of the revised legislative framework in the area of 
the rule of law, including through training and awareness-raising, to make it an effective 
tool to combat organised crime; 
 further increase the number of prosecutors in the Special Prosecution Office investigating 
and prosecuting high-profile organised crime cases, and provide training to strengthen 
their capacity to conduct financial investigations, confiscate assets and effectively protect 
witnesses;  
 concretely implement the intelligence-led and community policing approaches, including 
through more relevant criminal intelligence reporting and improved tasking within the 
police directorates, to enable more proactive policing. 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
Key institutions in the fight against organised crime include the Special Prosecution Office 
and the serious crimes departments of the Kosovo Basic Courts. An organised crime 
directorate (including a new sector for cybercrime investigations) in police headquarters is 
complemented by specialised units at regional level, assisted by forensic units and the Kosovo 
Forensic Agency. There are 436 Kosovo Police officers per 100,000 inhabitants, compared to 
the EU average of 318 in 2016 according to Eurostat. They are relatively well trained and 
equipped, and have modern IT infrastructure. The Kosovo Academy for Public Safety 
provides a good level of initial and in-service training for police and public security bodies 
such as correctional or customs services. 
Kosovo Customs, the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) and the tax administration are 
responsible for monitoring and controlling the internal and cross-border/boundary flow of 
goods, materials and capital that might be involved in any form of organised crime. The FIU 
specifically assists with analysing and disseminating information on money laundering and 
terrorism financing. It also has the capacity to freeze suspicious financial transactions.  
The Kosovo Police established the Asset Recovery Office within the Directorate for 
Economic Crime Investigations. The Office should be fully operationalised and further 
developed by all responsible parties, as it has received limited requests to date. There is 
operational cooperation between police, tax and customs services through mutual access and 
the interoperability of databases. However, faster, more direct access to the relevant databases 
is needed. There is still a need for better cooperation and coordination between all the 
institutions. The Special Prosecution Office remains the weakest link. 
Criminal law provisions on organised crime are broadly in line with relevant European 
standards. The newly adopted Criminal Code amended several provisions on organised 
crime. It now contains extended statutory limitation periods for various serious crimes and 


===== PAGE 35 =====
 
34 
 
increased penalty levels for corruption and many organised crime acts and offences. The 
revision has brought most provisions of the code into line with best European practices and 
the acquis. While the Criminal Procedure Code was substantially revised and adopted by 
the government, it has not yet been passed into law by the Assembly. The draft Criminal 
Procedure Code includes revised provisions on search and confiscation, on admissibility of 
evidence, concerning the imbalance between the defence and prosecution at trial, on the 
various appeal possibilities and on the prescribed time period for investigations into cases of 
organised crime and corruption. For related legislative reforms in the rule of law area, see the 
section on the fight against corruption.  
The Law on money laundering and terrorism financing is not fully in line with the EU 
acquis and international standards. The main flaws in the legal and institutional framework 
remain; i.e. (i) the ambiguity of shared supervisory responsibility of the financial sector 
between the FIU and the Central Bank; (ii) the lack of targeted financial sanctions and 
measures to ensure full deprivation of terrorists’ assets; (iii) significant deficiencies with 
regard to the registration, monitoring and oversight of NGOs for the purpose of countering the 
financing of terrorism; (iv) significant loopholes in the supervisory regime, in particular for 
the non-banking sector; and (v) uneven and ineffective suspicious transaction reporting in all 
sectors as regards preventive measures (see also section on freedom of movement of capital).  
The implementation of the Law on the interception of telecommunications, adopted in 
May 2015, was finally completed by May 2018, with the installation of the last technical 
equipment. However, it remains unclear whether all internet providers are properly connected 
to the liaison unit in the Chief State Prosecution Office. Legislation on cybercrime is 
generally in line with the EU acquis. The ongoing revision of the Law on the prevention of 
and the fight against cybercrime would benefit from available international experts to better 
respond to the fast-changing cybercrime challenges. Legislation on trafficking in human 
beings is broadly aligned with the relevant EU Directive, but implementation could be 
improved. 
Central to the strategic framework on the fight against organised crime is the 2018-2022 
strategy and action plan against organised crime. There are additional strategies and action 
plans in place on arms control; the informal economy, money laundering and terrorist 
financing; terrorism; the prevention of violent extremism; trafficking in human beings; 
narcotics; and cybersecurity.  
The Kosovo Police has produced three serious and organised crime threat assessment 
(SOCTA) reports based on Europol’s methodology and drafts annual crime strategic 
assessment reports. It is important that the threats identified are translated into operational 
priorities backed up with adequate resources. The drafting of the 2016-2018 SOCTA in 2019 
will be an important exercise in this regard.  
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
On the track record in the fight against high level corruption and organised crime, the IT 
tracking mechanism for high-profile cases, including organised crime, is operational (see 
fight against corruption). By April 2019, a total of 51 cases were included in the track record. 
There have been 38 indictments to date (although two indictments were later merged into one 
single case). Of these, 27 have been in relation to corruption and 11 in relation to organised 
crime. In total, 9 cases have received a final ruling, although none were related to organised 
crime. In July 2018, the European Commission confirmed that Kosovo has met the 
benchmark in its visa liberalisation roadmap to strengthen the track record in the fight against 
high level corruption and organised crime. These efforts should continue and the Commission 
will continue to actively monitor the further development of the track record in the future. 


===== PAGE 36 =====
 
35 
 
The standard operating procedure regarding the track record cases should be revised in order 
to ensure that all high-level corruption and organised crime cases are covered by the Joint 
Team for the Selection and Targeting of Serious Crimes (beyond the cases prioritised for the 
visa liberalisation benchmark) in a comprehensive and overall track record. 
Courts and prosecution could not provide consolidated data on the total number of 
indictments and final judgements for the charge of “organised crime” as defined in the United 
Nations Convention against Transnational Organised Crime. As regards those organised 
crime-related cases currently not included in the track record, in the reporting period, 
indictments were filed for 71 persons and 4 were found guilty in relation to trafficking in 
human beings. Also, 15 persons were indicted and 5 were found guilty for arms trafficking 
and 11 were indicted and 4 found guilty for money laundering. Only a fraction of all the cases 
involving trafficking in human beings, trafficking in arms and money laundering 
simultaneously also involve charges of organised crime. Police and prosecutors need to be 
more proactive in investigating and prosecuting potential organised criminal groups or 
organisations behind the initial perpetrators. Further efforts are needed to boost the number of 
final convictions for organised crime and organised crime-related cases.  
Police capacity for combating organised crime is good. However, the police are still subject to 
corruption and political pressure, which hinder the investigation of organised crime.  
Intelligence-led policing remains weakly implemented. A new strategy in this field is being 
drafted for 2019-2023 and should be adopted soon. The Kosovo Police Information System 
(the new analytical tool to help investigate organised crime) is not yet fully utilised. There is a 
need for more specialised training sessions for all institutions involved in fighting more 
complex organised crime and a need for closer international cooperation. The Special 
Prosecution Office needs to be strengthened (see sections on the functioning of the judiciary 
and the fight against corruption). 
Kosovo regularly exchanges information with Europol via EULEX and with Interpol via the 
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Kosovo’s application 
to join Interpol was rejected at the General Assembly meeting in November 2018. A working 
arrangement concerning strategic cooperation with Europol is being negotiated. Kosovo 
Police participated in joint operations with EU Member States under the European 
Multidisciplinary Platform Against Criminal Threats (EMPACT), including operational 
activities related to migrant smuggling and firearms. Kosovo Police cooperates on a bilateral 
basis with some EU Member States. Kosovo has concluded 74 police cooperation agreements, 
including with 18 countries, a number of EU agencies and international organisations. 
Lack of trust continues to hamper effective implementation of witness protection 
mechanisms. Regional and international cooperation need to be improved, with more 
agreements on allocating witnesses abroad and sharing information. Prosecutors and judges 
need more training on how to protect witnesses effectively. 
The fight against money laundering and terrorist financing is not efficient enough to 
produce convincing results. Money laundering is often not prosecuted as a standalone crime, 
but in connection with other criminal offences, which hampers progress in this area. Financial 
investigations are not effective and not conducted systematically in parallel with the criminal 
procedure in corruption and organised crime cases. Inter-agency cooperation and coordination 
have to improve significantly. The Kosovo authorities should follow up on and implement the 
recommendations of recent expert reports (one based on Financial Action Task Force (FATF) 
and the Committee of Experts on the Evaluation of Anti-Money Laundering Measures and the 
Financing of Terrorism (MONEYVAL) standards; the other based on the Group of States 
against Corruption (GRECO) standards).  


===== PAGE 37 =====
 
36 
 
In the reporting period, the total value of preliminary asset confiscations rose to almost EUR 
28 million (compared to EUR 10.9 million in 2017), while the value of assets which were 
finally confiscated amounted to EUR 49,394 (compared with EUR 700,000 in 2017). The 
confiscation of criminal assets should become a strategic priority in the fight against 
organised crime, terrorism and high-level corruption in Kosovo. The adoption of the revised 
Criminal Code, the pending revision of the Criminal Procedure Code, and especially the 
adoption of the Law on extended powers of confiscation, are important steps forward for 
Kosovo’s tools for freezing, managing and confiscating criminal assets, provided the laws are 
implemented effectively. The Law on extended powers of confiscation aligns Kosovo with the 
EU Directive on freezing and confiscation. It gives prosecutors simple and robust tools to 
confiscate assets without the need to link them directly to any given offence. The new Law 
reverses the burden of proof, allowing for the confiscation of property acquired illegally and 
transferred to third persons, and introduces extended powers of investigation for confiscation 
purposes, including through ‘disclosure orders’. The revised legal framework should now be 
properly implemented to produce results. Serious consideration should be given to 
establishing an asset confiscation fund, which would allocate confiscated funds in part to law 
enforcement and in part to social re-use projects.  
As regards arms trafficking, Kosovo is implementing its strategy and the Law on the 
legalisation and surrender of weapons, ammunition and explosive devices. A legalisation 
campaign for small arms and light weapons is being carried out. The Ministry of Internal 
Affairs has a database in which it registers all arms imported to Kosovo (these are marked on 
arrival). Kosovo has signed the roadmap for a sustainable solution to the illegal possession, 
misuse and trafficking of small arms and light weapons and their ammunition in the Western 
Balkans, in the framework of the Berlin Process, and submitted its action plan within this 
framework. A firearms focal point in the Kosovo Police is fully operational and can be 
regarded as an example of a regional best practice. The involvement of armed groups in arms 
smuggling is of serious concern. Kosovo has improved significantly in the fight against 
firearms trafficking, not only through normal investigation, but also through forensic work.  
Kosovo remains a country of origin, transit and destination of victims of trafficking in 
human beings, notably for sexual exploitation. In 2018, 13 female victims and 1 male victim 
were identified; all except one were under the age of 18.  
While initial steps have been taken, a more effective law enforcement response focusing on 
the detection, traceability and prosecution of cyber criminals remains to be established. 
Cigarette and tobacco smuggling in Kosovo remains at relatively low levels.  
Proactively fighting organised crime and corruption remains fundamental to countering 
criminal infiltration of the political, legal and economic systems. 
Cooperation in the field of drugs 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
The 2007 Law on narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and precursors governs Kosovo’s 
policy on drugs. The Law is being revised to align it with more recent EU legislation. 
Drug-related offences are primarily covered by the Criminal Code. Kosovo’s legal framework 
is broadly in line with European legislation, but enforcement remains weak. The new 
2018-2022 strategy and action plan were approved and budget for. A coordination mechanism 
to prevent and fight drug trafficking and the abuse of precursors is in place. In line with the 
new strategy, a National Drugs Observatory was set up in the reporting period, although its 
resources remain limited. The position of head of the Observatory has been vacant since the 


===== PAGE 38 =====
 
37 
 
end of 2018. Kosovo should formally establish an early warning system to follow up on the 
two contact points already in place. Sustainable and routine data collection should be ensured. 
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
Kosovo continues to be a storage and transit country for heroin and cannabis. Around 800 kg 
of marijuana, 120 kg of heroin and 1 kg of cocaine were seized in 2018. While marijuana 
seizures dropped significantly compared to the previous reporting period, the amount of 
heroin seized rose substantially, mainly due to a single police operation in December 2018, 
which seized 113 kg. Overall, drug seizures remain low. Organised crime groups (mainly 
Albanian-speaking) continue to play a dominant role in large-scale heroin and cocaine 
trafficking and its subsequent distribution in the EU. Some progress was made in increasing 
police resources and strengthening inter-institutional and international cooperation. Kosovo 
needs to further intensify the identification and dismantling of organised crime groups 
trafficking drugs from or through its territory, and tackling proceeds of crime that are 
laundered on its territory. The prosecution remains understaffed and not sufficiently trained to 
efficiently deal with drug-related offences. In the reporting period, there were 2,564 ongoing 
cases involving drugs (concerning 3,394 persons), 1,614 cases (concerning 2,065 persons) 
were solved and 385 persons were found guilty by the courts. Secure storage has been set up 
for seized drugs awaiting destruction, although a protocol for the handling, storage and 
destruction of drug precursors still needs to be drafted. 
Educational activities and public awareness-raising of the consequences of drug abuse need to 
intensify. The police, community safety officers and teachers continue to receive training on 
the dangers of drug abuse. Addiction treatment and methadone therapy is being offered.  
Kosovo continues to cooperate with the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug 
Addiction and provides regular reports to it through its designated focal point. Kosovo 
submitted a request at the end of 2018 to sign working arrangements with the Centre. Kosovo 
would benefit from an enhanced involvement in the EU Policy Cycle.  
Fight against terrorism  
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
The main institutions involved in combating terrorism are the Office of the Prime Minister, 
the Ministries of Internal Affairs, of Justice and of Foreign Affairs, the Police, the Kosovo 
Intelligence Agency, the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) and the prosecution service, 
including the Special Prosecution Office. As the Coordinator for Countering Terrorism (CT), 
the Minister of Internal Affairs is in charge of developing policies and strategies to combat 
terrorism, evaluating strategic intelligence and ensuring coordination. The Coordinator for 
Countering Violent Extremism (CVE) works in the Prime Minister’s Office.  
The FIU is a crucial part of the system to combat terrorism financing. However, its staff and 
resources should be increased to tackle this phenomenon effectively and they should be given 
the appropriate training. The Kosovo authorities set up an Inter-Institutional Committee for 
the handling of violent extremism in the reporting period. It deals exclusively with cases of 
foreign terrorist fighters and non-combatant returnees (women, children and the elderly). 
Kosovo expressed interest in bringing back its non-combatant citizens from the conflict zone 
in Syria/Iraq and carried out such a return operation in April 2019. 
Kosovo’s legal framework is mostly in line with the EU acquis and international instruments 
on anti-terrorism. Kosovo has legislation criminalising the phenomenon of foreign terrorist 
fighters in line with UN Security Council Resolution 2178 (2014). The offence of terrorism 


===== PAGE 39 =====
 
38 
 
financing is included in the Law on combating money laundering and the financing of 
terrorism. However, the Law is still not fully in line with EU and international standards.  
Kosovo has a strategy and action plan against terrorism (2018-2023) and a strategy and 
action plan on the prevention of violent extremism and radicalisation leading to 
terrorism (2015-2020). The strategy against terrorism is in line with the EU’s 
counterterrorism strategy. Governance in the CT/CVE area is highly complex, with the CT 
and CVE strategies covered by different bodies, which could communicate better with each 
other. In a positive step, the authorities recently appointed a single CT/CVE Coordinator to 
oversee the delivery and implementation of both areas. In the longer term, consideration could 
be given to a merger of the two strategies into a single strategy. A communication strategy 
to raise awareness and gain the wider support of stakeholders across society should be 
finalised and adopted.  
The Kosovo authorities and the EU signed the joint action plan on counter-terrorism for the 
Western Balkans in October 2018. The EU and Kosovo will now bilaterally follow-up on 
priority actions.  
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
Kosovo has further stepped up its efforts to fight terrorism, including measures to prevent 
violent extremism. Since 2016, there have been no new reported cases of Kosovo citizens 
travelling to the conflicts in Syria/Iraq as foreign terrorist fighters. Since 2012 until today, 
an estimated 355 Kosovo citizens (256 men, 52 women and 47 children) left for conflict 
zones in the Middle East, mostly as foreign terrorist fighters. 71 children were born in the 
conflict zone. 242 Kosovo citizens have returned (124 men, 38 women, 80 children), 96 died 
(91 killed, 5 died of other natural causes), and 97 remain in the theatre (47 men, 8 women, 42 
children). Out of the 242 returnees, 110 of them (4 men, 32 women and 74 children) were 
returned from the conflict zone in an operation organised by the government in April 2019. 
Kosovo’s law enforcement and judicial institutions continue to respond robustly to 
terrorism. The police have arrested a substantial number of people who joined terrorist groups 
since 2012. A significant number of cases ended in convictions. In the reporting period, the 
Kosovo Police Terrorism Directorate initiated 4 new cases for criminal offences related to 
terrorism and arrested 12 suspects in 5 separate operations, including 6 arrested as a result of 
joint months-long investigations with the Belgian and German authorities. In 2018, final court 
decisions were reached in 6 terrorism cases (4 ended in convictions and 2 in 
acquittals). Serious consideration should be given to establishing a Joint Threat Assessment 
Centre, including a threat level grading system, in order to keep all agencies and the public 
better informed and to enhance operational responses, including as regards the protection of 
critical infrastructure. The fight against money laundering and terrorist financing is not 
effective enough to produce convincing results (see section on the fight against organised 
crime). 
Despite these efforts, the authorities continue to face the challenge of violent extremism and 
radicalisation. This is stoked in part by funding from foreign organisations that preach 
extremist ideologies. Violent extremist groups also actively use social media to spread 
propaganda and recruit followers. Kosovo should step up its efforts to counter these external 
influences, including through increasing its investigative capacities, countering terrorist 
content online, enhancing the resilience of local communities to violent extremism and 
empowering civil society and faith-based organisations. It should explore further how it can 
use existing local security councils, and the pilot multi-agency approach (where individuals 
are assisted on a case-by-case basis) in the municipality of Gjilan/Gnjilane in the prevention 


===== PAGE 40 =====
 
39 
 
of violent extremism and radicalisation. Social, community-based responses, including a 
gender-based perspective, aimed in particular at marginalised young people, are needed. 
Substantial progress was made in the reporting period with regard to creating better conditions 
for rehabilitation and reintegration. In 2018, the authorities established a programme within 
the Correctional Service. In addition, the Ministry of Internal Affairs established a Division 
for Prevention and Reintegration of Radicalised Persons and developed a draft reintegration 
programme. The authorities cooperate with the Kosovo Islamic Community. Regarding 
returned fighters, a coherent judicial policy combined with a coordinated and dedicated 
approach by the authorities is needed. The performance of the newly established Division in 
the Ministry of Internal Affairs will be crucial in this respect, since it will work closely with 
all actors on reintegration on an individual basis. Improved cooperation among law 
enforcement and intelligence services, especially across the Western Balkans region, is 
needed. The possible link between organised crime and terrorism should be assessed in more 
detail.   
Kosovo should focus on an inclusive educational system to prevent radicalisation of 
vulnerable young people. It has made some progress, including through the creation of a 
teachers’ manual and the extensive training of teachers (see section on education). It is 
actively participating in the Western Balkan Counter-Terrorism initiative (WBCTi). 
Legal and irregular migration 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
The Department of Citizenship, Asylum and Migration in the Ministry of Internal Affairs is in 
charge of implementing migration policy. The Directorate for Migration and Foreigners in the 
Kosovo Border Police deals with irregular migrants. Following past legal revisions, the legal 
framework is largely in line with the acquis. However, a number of administrative 
instructions are still awaiting approval. 
Kosovo has signed readmission agreements with 24 countries, including 20 EU Member 
States and members of the Schengen area. No new readmission agreements were signed in the 
reporting period, but Kosovo sought to launch negotiations for readmission agreements with 
six more EU Member States and three non-EU countries. No agreement exists with the EU as 
a whole.  
The adoption of a new 2019-2023 strategy and action plan on migration is pending. It 
provides for an enhanced implementation monitoring mechanism, with contact points in all 
participating institutions under the leadership of the Government Authority on Migration; this 
should further improve the exchange of information and inter-institutional coordination. 
Migration profiles drafted and adopted in 2018 contain an extensive analysis of migration data 
and ‘push’ and ‘pull’ factors, together with recommendations and policy guidance. As a good 
first step, they were used in the formulation of the new strategy and action plan. However, the 
new strategy was drafted without any prior in-depth evaluation of the 2013-2018 strategy. The 
Government Authority is well positioned to take a more proactive leadership role. A new 
statute for this body is being prepared and should be approved by the government. Its mandate 
should further strengthen its role and clarify its composition and function.  
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
A total of 595 migrants entered Kosovo irregularly in 2018, of whom 518 were sheltered in 
the asylum centre. The three main nationalities represented were Syrian, Palestinian and 
Turkish. In all, 46 individuals were detained in the detention centre in 2018, of whom 42 were 
forcibly returned to their country of origin. Two asked to be returned voluntarily to their 


===== PAGE 41 =====
 
40 
 
country of origin; these were the first cases of assisted voluntary return from Kosovo. Most of 
the individuals were returned within a reasonable period of time (between 1 day and 11 
months). Two were still at the detention centre at the end of 2018. Return operations continue 
to be hindered by status-related issues. Nevertheless, Kosovo should make further efforts to 
establish a return mechanism for irregular migrants, in line with EU standards and practices.  
Providing proper care and security for the most vulnerable groups of migrants remains a 
challenge. Measures are in place to prevent migrant smugglers from infiltrating the centre.  
Smuggling networks from Kosovo facilitate secondary movements of irregular migrants from 
entry points along the Balkan route. In the reporting period, the Kosovo Police investigated 21 
cases of migrant smuggling and arrested 20 people.  
There remain gaps in enforcement, in particular due to a lack of coordination between 
government agencies. Parts of the Department of Citizenship, Asylum and Migration remain 
understaffed, despite some staff increases. Over the reporting period, staff became more 
specialised thanks to a number of training courses, ranging from advanced skills for detecting 
falsified documents, return escorts, combating trafficking in human beings, screening and 
assumption of nationalities, to assisted voluntary return and reintegration. However, there is 
still a lack of sufficient specialised staff, including in the Kosovo Police and the Asylum 
(Reception) Centre and Detention Centre for Foreigners. There have been considerable 
improvements in data management, analysis and exchange, including the ability to produce 
periodical reports based on Eurostat templates. The border police needs further 
capacity-building in relation to protection-sensitive migration. 
Kosovo has a reception facility for irregular migrants in Vranidoll/Vrani Do that can host 70 
people and provide appropriate accommodation for vulnerable groups. Legal provisions are in 
place to uphold the fundamental rights of irregular migrants or foreigners hosted in the centre. 
However, the centre is facing some structural issues, mainly relating to improper housing 
units, a lack of secure areas and a lack of in-house medical facilities. There is also a lack of 
adequate specialised supervisory staffing to ensure basic rights and needs, especially 
psycho-social support. Challenges remain as regards communication between officials and 
irregular migrants, despite the sharing of interpreters among countries of the region through 
the Migration, Asylum and Refugee Regional Initiative. The authorities should take further 
action to find qualified interpreters to service both the asylum and detention centres. 
The readmission agreements with EU Member States and Schengen associated countries are 
being implemented smoothly. The number of asylum requests by Kosovo citizens in both EU 
and Schengen associated countries has fallen steadily, from 73 240 in 2015, 11 970 in 2016, 
7 575 in 2017 to 5 100 in 2018. Mirroring the trend in asylum requests, the overall number of 
Kosovo citizens readmitted has dropped from 18 789 in 2015, 11 030 in 2016, 4 509 in 2017 
to 2 395 in 2018 (1 668 forced and 727 voluntary). Kosovo achieved a return rate of 85.9% of 
Kosovo citizens ordered to leave EU territory in 2017. The lack of a screening tool for 
returnees makes it harder to identify vulnerable persons, including victims of trafficking. The 
implementation of Kosovo’s 2018-22 reintegration strategy and action plan will require 
proper evaluation. Following the de-centralisation of the reintegration process, municipalities 
continue to face challenges in providing services. While municipalities have improved their 
capacities to deal with reintegration policy, their budget allocations are still insufficient. 
Overall, there is a need for better inter-institutional coordination, including with 
municipalities, better cooperation with NGOs and international organisations, and improved 
systemic monitoring and evaluation. In the reporting period, 3 165 people benefitted from 
sustainable assistance services provided by the Reintegration Fund. Further efforts are still 
needed to put in place a gender-sensitive system that reaches the most vulnerable returnees 
(including Roma and Ashkali) and focuses more on sustainable community assistance, 


===== PAGE 42 =====
 
41 
 
including through services such as income generation. Many returnees do not receive 
sufficient information.  
Asylum 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
The institutions for handling asylum requests are in place. The Department for Citizenship, 
Asylum and Migration is the first-instance body in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The 
National Commission for Refugees reviews appeals. A final judicial appeal can be lodged 
with the Supreme Court. After rejection of a request for asylum or cessation of procedure, the 
Department’s Division for Return and Readmission is responsible for enforcing the decision. 
Following past legal revisions, the legal framework on asylum is largely in line with the 
acquis. However, important secondary legislation in the area remains to be adopted.  
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
For asylum procedures, the competent authorities have improved their capacity to evaluate 
asylum claims on the basis of the merits of the application, but further training is required to 
ensure better assessments on merits. In addition, further capacity should be provided for 
procedures concerning unaccompanied minors. Interviews are often complicated by the lack 
of adequate interpretation. The number of asylum requests rose to 595 in 2018, from 147 in 
2017, an increase by over 300%. Following the forced deportation of six Turkish nationals at 
the end of March 2018 (see section on fundamental rights), there has been a marked rise of 
asylum requests from Turkish nationals already legally residing in Kosovo. In 2018, a total of 
50 applicants received a positive answer in the form of subsidiary protection; this represented 
a significant increase. However, Kosovo is still mainly a transit country. Most asylum 
requests are suspended, as applicants disappear without completing the procedure. Kosovo 
has the capacity to obtain and store asylum-seekers’ fingerprints. Although fully effective and 
protection-sensitive entry systems are not in place, no documented instances of refoulement or 
forced return have been identified in recent years. 
Staffing levels are generally adequate for the number of asylum requests. However, the 
Centre for Asylum-Seekers, which is in charge of the reception, registration, 
accommodation and movement of asylum-seekers within and outside the Centre, is 
understaffed. There is also a lack of psychosocial and legal support, assistance with child 
development and education, and support from social services. Although a referral system at 
the border/boundary, including access to legal aid, are provided for in secondary legislation, it 
is not yet in place.   
Kosovo has a contingency plan to manage the potential flow of refugees and migrants, which 
is regularly updated. The roles of the various institutions in the plan should be better defined, 
while institutional coordination should be improved. The reception centres identified in the 
plan should already be made operational where possible. The European Asylum Support 
Office is helping the Kosovo authorities to harmonise practices by implementing the common 
European asylum system and coordinating with the European networks for receptions. 
Visa policy 
Kosovo has yet to fully align its legislation with the EU visa  policy. Under a 2013 
government decision, Kosovo imposes visa requirements on nationals of 88 countries. The 
number of Kosovo consulates issuing visas remained at 16. In the reporting period, 20 visas 
with a validity of 15 calendar days were issued at borders. The visa-issuing authorities have 
the capacity to collect biometric identifiers digitally from visa applicants, although the 


===== PAGE 43 =====
 
42 
 
equipment needs upgrading. All granted visas and rejections are registered in Kosovo’s visa 
information system. 
The citizens of Kosovo remain the only citizens from the Western Balkans that have to apply 
for and obtain a visa to travel to the Schengen Area. A visa liberalisation dialogue started in 
2012. In May 2016, the Commission issued a legislative proposal for visa liberalisation, on 
the understanding that by the day of its adoption by the European Parliament and the Council, 
Kosovo would have ratified the border/boundary agreement with Montenegro and 
strengthened its track record in the fight against organised crime and corruption. After the 
ratification of the border/boundary demarcation agreement in March 2018 and the 
strengthening its track record, the Commission confirmed in July 2018 that Kosovo has 
fulfilled all the benchmarks of the visa liberalisation roadmap. It recommended that the 
Council and European Parliament move forward with the proposal. In March 2019, the 
European Parliament voted in support of the Commission proposal in its first reading. The 
proposal is pending in the Council. The Kosovo authorities launched a public awareness 
campaign on visa liberalisation, which should continue in order to educate the population 
about their rights and obligations under potential future visa liberalisation regime. 
Schengen and borders 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
The National Centre for Border Management has a joint intelligence risk and threat 
analysis unit collecting data and information from the agencies responsible for integrated 
border management (IBM): police, customs and the Food and Veterinary Agency. The Centre 
is seen as one of the most important elements of Kosovo’s capacity to manage the security of 
its border/boundary effectively. A clear political commitment is needed to ensure that it 
operates to its full potential, including through implementation of the findings of the recent 
review through the associated action plan.  
The legislative framework for managing Kosovo’s borders/boundary is largely in line with 
the acquis and international standards. The 2013-2018 IBM strategy and revised action 
plan are aligned with the 2006 EU approach to IBM. A new IBM strategy and action plan for 
2019-2023 are under preparation. 
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
The Border Department of Kosovo Police is well staffed, with a total of 1 322 officers, and 
generally meets minimum EU standards for border controls. The infrastructure of border 
crossing points has improved and the border management system was completely upgraded. 
However, its effectiveness remains limited by the lack of connection to important 
international networks such as Europol’s Secure Information Exchange Network Application 
(SIENA) and Interpol’s I-24/7, due to status-related issues.  
Kosovo has a working arrangement with the European Border and Coast Guard Agency, 
which enables close cooperation on irregular migration, border crimes, border security and 
overall border management, including the daily exchange of data since October 2018. Kosovo 
participated actively in the Western Balkan risk analysis network. Inter-agency cooperation 
is good, but it could be improved at the highest level and especially as regards information 
exchange and joint risk analysis. A border police anti-corruption strategy is in place, but no 
cases of corruption at the border/boundary have been detected to date. 
On cooperation in the region, Kosovo has concluded 23 IBM agreements. Kosovo and 
Albania operate joint border controls, with one Albanian and one Kosovo border police 
officer sharing a booth. Two common cross-border police cooperation centres are in 


===== PAGE 44 =====
 
43 
 
operation, one with Albania (Vermica) and one with North Macedonia (Hani I Elezit), as well 
as the common trilateral cross-border police cooperation centre (Plave) between Montenegro, 
Albania and Kosovo. The functioning and staffing of these centres should be improved, so 
that they can operate at their full potential. Interim IBM common crossing-points with Serbia 
continue to be operational. There has been limited progress in establishing the six permanent 
IBM common crossing-points between Serbia and Kosovo, as stipulated in the IBM 
agreement in the context of the EU-facilitated Belgrade-Pristina dialogue (See section 5 -
Normalisation of relations between Kosovo and Serbia). Additional measures need to be 
taken to prevent illegal crossings and criminal activities, including corruption.  
Judicial cooperation in civil and criminal matters 
While Kosovo is not party to most multilateral treaties governing judicial cooperation in 
criminal and civil matters, it unilaterally applies internationally recognised treaty standards. 
As regards the 1980 Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child 
Abduction, the relevant cases are dealt with by the Ministry of Justice. Kosovo unilaterally 
aligned with the 1961 Hague Convention on Abolishing the Requirement of Legalisation for 
Foreign Public Documents.  
Judicial cooperation in criminal matters is governed by the 2013 Law on international legal 
cooperation in criminal matters and 24 bilateral agreements with other countries. A legal 
framework for judicial cooperation in civil matters would help clarify rules and procedures, 
and work has been done on the relevant draft Law. With countries with which Kosovo does 
not have a bilateral agreement cooperation is based on the principle of reciprocity. For judicial 
cooperation in civil matters, Kosovo issued 199 requests towards EU Member States and 
received 173 responses. It received 364 requests from EU Member States and provided 347 
responses. The 2015 Procedures on Mutual Legal Cooperation agreed between Belgrade and 
Pristina form the basis for judicial cooperation between judicial authorities in Kosovo and 
Serbia. Most other countries that do not recognise Kosovo’s independence have voluntarily 
accepted the EU’s facilitating role. However, a lack of cooperation by some non-recognising 
states has been observed, resulting in cases of impunity. Due to status-related issues, Eurojust 
cases can currently only be opened towards EULEX and UNMIK. No cases have been opened 
towards these entities since 2015.  
All aspects of customs cooperation are now covered in Chapter 29 - Customs union. 
Counterfeiting of the euro (criminal law aspects) 
Kosovo is broadly in line with the acquis on the suppression of counterfeit currency, and has 
established competent authorities and procedures for dealing with counterfeit money. 
However, the Criminal Code is only partially compliant with the relevant EU Directive. 
Technical analysis of counterfeit money (including euro banknotes and coins), in line with 
international standards, is mainly carried out by the Forensics Agency within the Ministry of 
Internal Affairs. The Forensics Agency has concluded an agreement with the European 
Commission on further cooperation on exchange, assistance and training for the protection of 
the euro against counterfeiting (the Pericles 2020 programme) (See section on Financial 
control). 


===== PAGE 45 =====
 
44 
 
3.  
FUNDAMENTALS FIRST: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND COMPETITIVENESS 
 
In line with the conclusions of the European Council in Copenhagen in June 1993, EU 
accession requires the existence of a functioning market economy and the capacity to cope 
with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union. 
Economic governance has become even more central in the enlargement process in recent 
years. The Commission’s monitoring takes place in two processes: the Economic Reform 
Programme exercise and the assessment (see below) of compliance with the economic criteria 
for accession. Every year, each enlargement country prepares an economic reform 
programme (ERP), which sets out a medium-term macro-fiscal policy framework and a 
structural reform agenda aimed at ensuring competitiveness and inclusive growth. The ERPs 
are the basis for country-specific policy guidance jointly adopted by the EU and the Western 
Balkans and Turkey at ministerial level in May each year. 
3.1. 
The existence of a functioning market economy 
Kosovo has made some progress and is at an early stage of developing a functioning market 
economy. Economic growth was robust in 2018, but the very challenging labour market 
situation remains a concern. Labour market participation and employment rates did not 
improve as compared with 2017. The government adhered to the fiscal rule, but spending 
pressures relating to social benefits for specific groups of the population and public 
employees’ wages pose risks to public finances and hinder private sector development. The 
business environment improved somewhat, but persistent challenges remain, including the 
widespread informal economy, a slow and inefficient judiciary, high prevalence of corruption 
and overall weak rule of law. Despite strong growth of services exports, economic 
diversification has advanced slowly. 
In order to improve the functioning of the market economy, Kosovo should in particular: 
 ensure that the 2020 budget complies with existing fiscal rules, in particular the wage bill 


===== PAGE 46 =====
 
45 
 
rule; 
 improve financial oversight and accountability of publicly owned enterprises and 
advancing their privatisation; 
 improve further the access to finance for SMEs by addressing the underlying legal and 
institutional factors; 
 develop active measures for increasing female labour market participation and 
employment. 
Economic governance 
Kosovo’s rules-based policy framework supports fiscal sustainability. However, new 
government initiatives pose risks to macroeconomic stability. Fiscal projections in the 2019-
2021 medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) and in the 2019 budget are in line with 
the fiscal rule. At the same time, the government is engaged in fiscal initiatives, such as 
recently adopted the Law on salaries for public employees and social transfers for specific 
groups that create significant fiscal risks with a potentially negative impact on 
macroeconomic stability. The policy guidance jointly agreed at the May 2018 Economic and 
Financial Dialogue between the EU and the Western Balkans and Turkey has been partially 
implemented. On the other hand, the recent introduction of 100% tariffs for all goods imports 
originating in Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina represents a direct violation of the Central 
European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA). 
Macroeconomic stability 
Economic activity has been growing steadily since 2015, but it is constrained by a 
narrow production base and significant under-utilisation of labour. Based on the 
aggregate of four quarters, real GDP growth reached 3.9%.3 In recent years, the economy has 
been driven by public investment in infrastructure and private consumption, the latter 
financed by large remittances from abroad and robust wage and credit growth. The 
exceptional (18.8%) export growth 
in 2017, supported by goods and 
services, slowed to 13.9% in 2018 due 
to a temporary fall in base metal 
exports. Economic diversification is 
proceeding 
slowly. 
Merchandise 
exports remain dominated by base 
metals and mineral products, which 
still account for around 48% of total 
exports. Services exports continued to 
grow, 
mainly 
linked 
to 
tourism 
spending by the diaspora.   
Kosovo’s per capita GDP is the lowest in the region. It stood at EUR 3,566 in nominal 
terms in 2017, which is about 26.3% of the EU average4 (the regional average is EUR 4,853). 
However, in terms of average gross wages (EUR 519 in 2016), Kosovo ranks second in the 
region (after Montenegro), which suggests weak competitiveness in an international context. 
Inequalities remain widespread due to a large informal sector, high inactivity rates and high 
wages in the public sector. 
                                                          
3  
The quarter-based annual estimate for 2017 is 3.7%. 
4  
World Bank data. 
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Kosovo: Real GDP growth and contributions 
Priv. cons.
Gov. cons.
GFCF
Stocks
Net exports
real GDP growth
Source: Macrobond, own calculations
% y-o-y


===== PAGE 47 =====
 
46 
 
The traditionally large current account deficit persisted in 2018. The goods trade deficit 
increased to 43% of GDP, from 38.4% in 2017, pushing up the current-account deficit 
to 8.1%. This was driven by strong growth in imports (13.6% year-over-year (y-o-y)) and a 
decline in goods exports (7% y-o-y). The widening trade deficit was partly mitigated by 
positive balances of services and remittances (1.4% and 12% of GDP, respectively). 
On the financing side, net foreign direct investment (FDI) fell by 16% y-o-y in 2018. The 
total FDI inflow was 3.3% of GDP, covering less than a half of the current-account deficit. 
The drop in FDI was due to higher repatriation of foreign firms’ profits for debt repayments, 
which reduced the scope for reinvestment of earnings. Reserve assets continued to decline, 
from 4.8 months of imports of goods and services in 2015 to 3.5 months in 2018.5  
Price developments are driven mainly by import prices for food and energy. Average 
annual inflation reached 1.1% in 2018, as price rises recovered gradually over the year, 
from -0.2% y-o-y in January to 2.9% y-o-y in December. The key driver was food prices, 
which were on the rise from July and hit 5.5% y-o-y in December following the introduction 
of the 100% tariffs on goods imported from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
Despite the lack of progress in revising the war veterans’ benefits scheme, fiscal stability 
was preserved in 2018, but the budget composition is not sufficiently conducive to 
growth. The 2018 budget deficit is estimated at 1% of GDP, well within the fiscal rule ceiling 
of 2%, while the overall fiscal deficit stood at 2.8% of GDP. Annual growth of budget 
revenue was 5.3%, while budget expenditure expanded by 11.2%. Higher social spending, 
caused by the failure to reform untargeted and costly war veterans’ benefits, was partly offset 
by the under-execution of the capital budget. Spending on subsidies and transfers has 
increased rapidly in recent years, reaching nearly 39% of current expenditure in the draft 2019 
budget, while the composition of 
benefits shifted away from poverty and 
inequality-focused transfers towards 
benefits for particular categories of the 
population. Apart from the fiscal 
impact, this has negative repercussions 
on labour market participation and 
competitiveness. 
By 
regional 
standards, 
Kosovo’s 
public 
debt 
remained relatively low (16.2% of 
GDP) in 20186, but it has risen steadily 
from nearly 10.6% of GDP in 2014. 
Fiscal governance has made some progress with respect to the credibility of the MTEF and 
budgetary projections. The collection of revenue has performed better than the execution of 
expenditure, which reflects a deeply entrenched problem of overspending for social benefits 
and over-optimistic planning of capital expenditure. The macroeconomic forecast underlying 
the 2019 budget is still considerably higher than the projections of other organisations.7 
Moreover, quarterly GDP figures do not match annual data. 
                                                          
5  
IMF data. 
6  
The simple average of public debt in the six Western Balkan economies was estimated at 47.9% of GDP 
in 2018. Kosovo’s public debt does not include its share of the former Yugoslavia’s debt, which the IMF 
has recently reclassified as contingent liability. 
7  
The 2019 budget assumes real GDP growth of 4.7%, while the IMF and Central Bank of Kosovo forecast 
4.2%. 
0
5
10
15
20
-4
-2
0
2
4
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Kosovo: Fiscal developments
Primary balance (lhs)
Interest (lhs)
GG balance (lhs)
Public Debt (rhs)
Source: IMF
% of GDP


===== PAGE 48 =====
 
47 
 
Given Kosovo’s unilateral euroisation, sound fiscal and financial policies are essential 
for maintaining macroeconomic stability. The existing fiscal rule, which provides the main 
anchor for fiscal sustainability, was fully respected in 2018. The planned fiscal expansion in 
the 2019 budget and likely additional spending, resulting from the recently adopted Law on 
salaries for public employees and from pension supplements for teachers, raise concerns as to 
the sustainability of public finances. Further downside risks stem from the currently discussed 
early retirement scheme for the police and maternity benefits for unemployed and 
self-employed women. 
Functioning of product markets 
Business environment 
The number of newly registered and terminated firms is in line with long-term trends. 
In 2017, the difference between new (9,223) and terminated firms (1,623) stood at 7,600, back 
in line with the historical trend after an exceptional performance in 2016, when the gap 
widened to 8 048 due to higher numbers on both sides. 
Kosovo made some progress in improving the business environment. While it made some 
improvements as regards registering a business and getting a loan, its overall ranking in the 
World Bank’s Doing Business report fell to 44th in 2018 from 40th a year earlier. Legislative 
changes contributed to a more favourable business environment. The new Law on business 
organisations (adopted in May 2018) improved the provisions on the registration of business 
organisations and corporate governance, and strengthened the rights of minority shareholders. 
A revamped electronic platform should speed up business registrations. The new Law on 
accounting, audit and financial reporting (adopted in April 2018) streamlines reporting 
requirements for companies and defines the interest of public entities in line with the acquis. 
Despite progress in adopting new legislation to improve the business environment, the 
private sector faces a number of challenges related to cumbersome administrative 
procedures, informality and corruption. With a large number of inspectorates, poor 
coordination of procedures and legal contradictions, the inspections process often remains a 
barrier to doing business in Kosovo. A new Law on inspections has been prepared and its 
adoption and implementation would help to address these concerns. Similarly, the large 
number of licences and permits still poses an administrative burden for businesses. The 
central register for permits and licences is still being updated. Slow and inconsistent 
adjudication in economic disputes remains a challenge. In 2018, the Kosovo Investment and 
Enterprise Support Agency (KIESA) continued to operate with limited resources and without 
permanent leadership. A further strengthening of KIESA, particularly by reinforcing 
after-care services for foreign investors and operationalising the high-level advisory board for 
the promotion of foreign investment, would be a key step towards enhancing prospects for 
investments and exports. 
The large informal sector (estimated at around 30% of GDP) creates unfair competition 
and weakens labour rights. In May 2019, Kosovo adopted a revised strategy and action plan 
for fighting the informal economy including measurable indicators to monitor progress in this 
area. 
State influence on product markets 
Kosovo’s state aid policy is not underpinned by a coherent approach. The government 
lacks the compatibility assessment of state aid as well as a comprehensive strategy and cost-
benefit evaluations for aid and subsidies granted. Most publicly owned enterprises remain 
reliant on public funding from the budget. Kosovo has yet to meet its Stabilisation and 
Association Agreement (SAA) obligations on state aid schemes and alignment with EU rules. 


===== PAGE 49 =====
 
48 
 
Financial support for the economic zones and industrial parks continued without a clear plan 
or a transparent impact or gap analysis, raising concerns on state aid compatibility. The 
impact of the Law on strategic investment, adopted in 2017, did not visibly affect investment 
in 2018, although 11 investors applied, with investment plans for a total of EUR 1.8 billion. 
Privatisation and restructuring 
Progress in privatisation remained slow.8 Publicly owned enterprises remain inefficient and 
lack transparency in their financial reporting and recruitment. After the completion of the 
board of directors in mid-2018, the Privatisation Agency of Kosovo conducted six asset sales 
from a total of 400 which are in tendering process. Twelve state-owned enterprises’ assets 
were put into liquidation in 2018, which is very low given the total number of 511 enterprises 
under the liquidation procedure in 2005-2018. The decision to freeze the privatisation of 
socially owned land has contributed to delays in the privatisation process. The socially owned 
Trepça mining complex was officially transformed and registered into a joint stock company 
in March 2019. Further steps to operationalise this transformation will require coordination 
among all affected stakeholders, with the overall aim to revitalise the enterprise. 
Functioning of the financial market 
Financial stability 
The financial sector remained stable, with adequate capitalisation and substantial 
liquidity buffers. Profitability remained high, with return on average equity (as of October 
2018) standing at 18.8% for the banking sector, 18.7% for micro-financial institutions and 
17% for insurance enterprises. The predominantly foreign-owned banking sector, which 
accounts for 64.8% of financial system assets, remained well-capitalised and liquid, with non-
performing loans standing at 2.7% of total loans at the end of 2018 (the lowest level in the 
region). The ratio of banks’ regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets stood at 16.1% in 
October 2018, well above the regulatory minimum of 12%. Banks continued to be 
predominantly financed by deposits, but the loan-to-deposit ratio rose to 83.9% in October 
2018 from 79% a year earlier, as the growth of loans outpaced deposit growth. Despite the 
increasing activity, insurance and micro-finance companies still do not account for more than 
7% of financial system assets, but the headline financial soundness indicators are at 
satisfactory levels9. 
Access to finance 
Lending has continued to expand, but financial intermediation is still at low levels. Bank 
lending expanded by 11.6% in January-October from 2017, facilitated by low interest rates, 
eased credit standards, guarantees extended by the Credit Guarantee Fund for lending to 
SMEs, and strengthened contract enforcement. Lending to firms (11.8%) and households 
(11.3%) registered similar rates of growth. The average interest rate spread declined to 
5.2 percentage points (pps) in October 2018, from 5.8 pps the previous year, pointing to 
strengthening competition for lending opportunities. Credit penetration, at around 40% of 
GDP, is low by Western Balkan standards, and channelling savings, including remittances, 
through the formal financial system into productive investment remains a challenge. 
                                                          
8  
According to World Bank estimates, the public sector in Kosovo still accounts for around a quarter of gross 
value added (GVA) and employment. 
9  
While the headline figure presents a satisfactory picture, there are a number of issues in the insurance 
sector, as some firms are still in the red and three of them are under-capitalised. 


===== PAGE 50 =====
 
49 
 
Functioning of the labour market 
Despite robust economic growth since 2015, labour market conditions remain difficult. 
According to the labour force survey (LFS), labour force participation fell to 40.9% in the last 
quarter of 2018, from 42.8% a year earlier. The participation rate of women stood at 18.4%, 
with more than a third of economically active women (33.4%) unemployed. The overall 
employment rate stood at 28.8%, as compared with 29.8% a year earlier. The wide gap 
between male and female employment rates (45.3% and 12.3% respectively) persisted.  
Unemployment slightly fell to 
29.6% from 30.5%. Persistently 
high 
youth 
unemployment 
(55.4%) points to a misalignment 
between education outcomes and 
labour market needs. Brain drain, 
especially of educated young 
people, 
also 
poses 
a 
medium/long-term 
economic 
challenge. Active labour market 
policies, 
pre-qualification 
schemes and vocational training 
programmes remain inadequate. 
The use of social benefits for specific groups of the population do not focus on poverty 
reduction and creates disincentives to work. The untargeted war veterans’ transfers not 
only undermine the soundness and fairness of the social benefits system, but also risk creating 
a snowball effect whereby other specific groups request similarly generous allowances, 
e.g. the recently adopted pension supplements for teachers. The relatively high salaries in the 
public sector, in particular in publicly owned enterprises, negatively affect the attractiveness 
of private-sector employment and exacerbate the skills gap. The lack of childcare facilities 
hinders female employment. 
3.2. 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the 
Union 
Kosovo has made some progress and is at an early stage in terms of capacity to cope with 
competitive pressure and market forces in the EU. Kosovo made some progress in improving 
road infrastructure, but there are large gaps in railway and energy infrastructure. Little 
progress was made in securing a stable energy supply and losses in the electricity sector 
remain very high. Kosovo made some progress as regards the digitalisation of the economy. 
Little progress was made on improving the quality of education and addressing skills gaps in 
the labour market. Structural changes are emerging only slowly and the economy remains 
highly reliant on the domestic trade sector. Export growth is driven mainly by service exports 
to the diaspora, while the lack of product diversification hinders the growth of goods exports. 
In order to improve competitiveness and long-term growth, Kosovo should in particular: 
 increase the provision of vocational education and training for professions in demand; 
 improve energy efficiency incentives for firms and households; 
 make the support schemes for renewable energy projects more cost efficient, by 
introducing competitive bidding for renewable support; 


===== PAGE 51 =====
 
50 
 
 ensure the implementation of the new Strategy and Action Plan 2019-2023 to fight the 
informal economy in accordance with the prescribed timetable. 
Education and innovation 
The education system is not responding sufficiently to labour market needs. While 
Kosovo’s public spending on education (4.7% of GDP in 2017) is broadly in line with 
middle-income countries with similar age profiles, spending per student in primary and 
secondary education is relatively low due to the large proportion of students (double the EU 
average) and is dominated by the wage bill for teachers. The enrolment rates in primary 
(96%) and secondary (88.1%) education are high, but low PISA10 scores and relatively high 
unemployment among tertiary education graduates (19.2% in Q2-2018) compared to the EU 
point to the poor quality and relevance of education. The work on vocational education reform 
is still at an early stage, focusing mainly on analysing the current situation in vocational 
education training (VET) schools. 
Spending on research remains virtually non-existent, currently representing only 0.1% 
of GDP. A new Ministry of Innovation was established in 2018 and EUR 1.1 million was 
allocated for specific labs and equipment at two regional innovation centres. 
Physical capital and quality of infrastructure 
Kosovo made progress in public road infrastructure investments. This includes the 
highway to Peja / Peć, the ongoing construction of a section of route 6 and preparatory work 
on route 7. Nevertheless, the transport system still faces a number of challenges, such as 
inadequate road maintenance, poor status of railways and weak administrative capacity of 
regulatory institutions. 
Unreliable energy supply remains a key bottleneck for Kosovo’s economic development. 
The government has taken steps to join the Albanian Power Exchange, but the new 400 kV 
transmission line and load frequency control with Albania are not operational, because of 
disagreements between Kosovo and Serbia on the implementation of the connection 
agreement reached in the EU-facilitated dialogue. Kosovo has no domestic gas infrastructure, 
but a pre-feasibility study on connecting Kosovo and Albania to the trans-Adriatic pipeline 
(TAP) project has been completed. The government has concluded a commercial agreement 
with the bidder on the construction of 
the 
Kosova e Re 
500 MW 
lignite 
power plant, which is due to start in 
2019. Following the World Bank’s 
withdrawal from the partial loan 
guarantee, financing arrangements for 
the estimated EUR 1 billion plus 
project are still to be settled. It may 
have a major impact on public 
finances, tariffs and the environment 
and this must be carefully reassessed. 
Boosting energy efficiency and diversification from coal remain important policy 
considerations. Despite investment in energy network infrastructure (EUR 15 million), 
distribution losses remain high even by regional standards, reaching nearly 24% in the first 
half of 2018. The energy efficiency Law (adopted in 2018) established an Energy Efficiency 
Fund, which will support the relevant measures in public buildings. No progress was made on 
                                                          
10  
OECD programme for international student assessment. 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
KO, 2006
EU, 2006
KO, 2016
EU, 2016
0
4
8
12
Kosovo: Selected indicators relative to population
Electricity production, GWh per 1000 inhabitants
Road length, km per 1000 inhabitants
Rail passenger-km per inhabitant, lhs
Source: Eurostat


===== PAGE 52 =====
 
51 
 
further energy efficiency measures, such as price deregulation for the household sector. 
Electricity produced from renewables accounts for 3.2% of total production. 
The digitalisation of the economy is gradually advancing. Kosovo had achieved the 
mid-term targets in the 2013-2020 digital agenda for Kosovo by mid-2018, as penetration of 
fixed broadband internet reached 91% and the number of mobile phone users stood at 103% 
of the population. 
Sectoral and enterprise structure 
The services sector continues to dominate the economy in terms of GDP and 
employment. Wholesale and retail trade accounts for the biggest group of registered 
enterprises (23.5% of the total), followed by manufacturing (9.7%), accommodation (9.6%) 
and construction (8.5%). The sectoral structure of gross value added (GVA) shows a steady 
decline in the share of agriculture, from 14% in 2009 to 9% in 2017, followed by shrinking 
contributions from public administration and real-estate activities (down from around 9% 
each in 2014 to around 7.5% in 2017). At the same time, the share of construction increased 
from its long-term average of 6.5% to 8% in 2017. The shares of wholesale and retail trades 
and industry, including mining, remain around their long-term averages (over 12% each), 
accounting together for nearly a quarter of GVA since 2012. These sectors also employed the 
largest (quite stable) proportions of workers (over 14% each over the last four years). The 
proportion of workers in construction rose rapidly from 9.5% in 2012 to nearly 13.9% 
in 2017. Despite agriculture’s shrinking contribution to GVA, employment in the sector 
resurged from 2.3% in 2015 to 4.4% in 2017, suggesting a shift to formal jobs, as this sector 
has a high rate of informal employment. 
Due to the dominance of micro-enterprises, Kosovo’s private sector cannot benefit from 
economies of scale. Although SMEs represent over 99% of registered enterprises, almost all 
of them are micro-firms employing 1-9 employees, while the proportion of larger firms 
(employing 10-249 workers) is only 1%. The entry into force of the Competitiveness of Small 
and Medium-Sized Enterprises (COSME) Agreement in 2018 should allow the effective use 
of the EU programme to support SMEs. 
Economic integration with the EU and price competitiveness 
 
The EU is Kosovo’s largest trading partner, with 41.3% of overall merchandise trade 
in 2018. It is followed by the CEFTA parties, with 29% of total trade. The CEFTA parties 
account for nearly 48% of Kosovo’s merchandise exports and 30% go to the EU. On the 
import side, the EU’s share is over 40%, followed by 28% from the CEFTA parties. The 
recent imposition of 100% import tariffs for goods originating in Serbia and BiH is in 
violation of CEFTA and hampers the development of a Western Balkans regional economic 
area (REA). The EU has repeatedly called on Kosovo to revoke this economically 
counterproductive measure. 
0
5
10
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Kosovo: Exports composition
EU
CEFTA
Other
Source: WiiW
% of GDP
0
20
40
60
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Kosovo: Imports composition
EU
CEFTA
Other
Source: WiiW
% of GDP


===== PAGE 53 =====
 
52 
 
The EU remains the main investor in Kosovo. Its share stood at 36% of net FDI stock in 
the third quarter of 2018. Germany and Switzerland (two countries with large Kosovar 
diasporas) accounted for 11% each, while a further 13% originated in Turkey. In terms of FDI 
flows the share of the EU was at 47% of total inflow in 2018, followed by 30% from 
Switzerland.11 
Overall trade openness increased to 79% of GDP in 2017 from 72% in 2013. Exports of 
goods and services increased from 22% to 27% of GDP due to a significant contribution from 
service exports. These remain dominated by travel services to the diaspora, but IT and other 
business services increased, reaching almost 10% of total service exports in 2018. Most of 
Kosovo’s goods exports still consist of basic raw materials and mineral products, reflecting 
limited diversification of the production sector. 
4. 
GOOD NEIGHBOURLY RELATIONS AND REGIONAL COOPERATION  
Good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation represent an essential aspect of 
Kosovo’s process of moving towards the EU. They contribute to stability, reconciliation and a 
climate that is conducive to addressing open bilateral issues and the legacies of the past. 
Kosovo maintained its engagement in a number of regional cooperation initiatives, such as the 
South-East European Cooperation Process, the Regional Cooperation Council, the Central 
European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA), the Energy Community Treaty, the Coalition for 
the Commission Tasked with Establishing the Facts about All Victims of War Crimes and 
Other Serious Human Rights Violations Committed on the Territory of the Former 
Yugoslavia (RECOM) and the Brdo-Brijuni process. Kosovo chaired a number of regional 
activities and events. Kosovo took part in the implementation of the Multiannual Action Plan 
(MAP) for the development of a Regional Economic Area in the Western Balkans, although 
more attention is needed to secure timely adoption of the incurred measures as well as 
streamlining regional commitments into domestic policies.  
However, the Kosovo government’s decision to impose a 100% tariff on imports from Serbia 
and Bosnia and Herzegovina has undermined regional cooperation efforts. 
Building on the results of previous summits, the July 2018 London Summit brought a 
renewed commitment to the connectivity agenda. Dialogue with the Western Balkans 
continued in Skopje on the implementation of the Digital Agenda, to which all leaders of the 
region had committed through a statement of support. More particularly concerning the 
negotiations on roaming fees, a regional agreement was signed at the Western Balkans Digital 
Summit in Belgrade in April 2019 enabling Roam like at Home (RLAH) as of July 2021. 
Kosovo participated in the European Commission’s regional conference on media (Media 
Days) in Skopje. Member States and the Western Balkan partners signed the Joint Action Plan 
on Counter Terrorism for the Western Balkans at the Justice Home Affairs Ministerial in 
Tirana in October 2018. Kosovo chairs the governing board of the Regional Youth 
Cooperation Office (RYCO) in 2019. Conditions for meetings were not conducive to the 
adoption of decisions necessary for the functioning of RYCO. In February 2019, at the 
Ministerial Meeting on Clean Energy Transition held in Podgorica, the Ministers of Energy 
and Environment of the Western Balkans committed to adopting concrete measures aiming at 
the implementation of the Paris Agreement and the Energy Community obligations based on 
the EU Clean Energy for All Europeans Package. Due to the energy dispute with Serbia, 
Kosovo’s Electricity Transmission Company is still not in a position to take full advantage of 
the regional electricity market. Kosovo ratified the Transport Community Treaty in October 
2018. Connectivity projects in the railway sector are under way.  
                                                          
11  
Data for January-October. 


===== PAGE 54 =====
 
53 
 
Kosovo should urgently complete its process of accession to the Regional School of Public 
Administration (ReSPA) Agreement, in order to be able to continue to benefit from ReSPA 
activities on an equal footing with other ReSPA members. 
The unresolved fate of missing persons from the 1990s conflicts remains a humanitarian 
concern in the Western Balkans. As of February 2019, a total of 10 247 persons are still 
missing across the region, according to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). 
Of these cases, 1 653 (84% men, 16% women) relate to the conflict in Kosovo and its 
aftermath. The Belgrade-Pristina Working Group on Missing Persons, chaired by the ICRC, 
held several sessions and in October 2018 adopted procedures on the handover of human 
remains. In November 2018, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Kosovo, Montenegro and 
Serbia signed a framework plan to promote regional cooperation in addressing the issue of 
persons missing from conflicts on the territory of the former Yugoslavia. The lack of new 
information on uncovered gravesites remains the main obstacle to solving cases. Kosovo’s 
Government Commission on Missing Persons has conducted assessment excavations in 20 
locations. Only seven cases of missing persons relating to the Kosovo conflict were solved in 
2018.   
Kosovo’s efforts in resolving the fate of missing persons continues to be undermined by 
inter-institutional and administrative issues. However, inter-institutional coordination and 
cooperation between the Institute of Forensic Medicine and the Governmental Commission on 
Missing Persons improved in the reporting period. The process of establishing a central 
register of missing persons has stalled again. The authorities still need to adopt secondary 
legislation on the establishment of such a register and on the closure of cases, to support 
implementation of the Law on missing persons.  
The post of Director of the Institute of Forensic Medicine was finally filled in August 2018. 
The Institute still does not meet the required standards for sustainable forensic practices, 
including forensic anthropology and archaeology. More needs to be done to build such 
capacity and to ensure continuous and sustainable funding of the Institute. Work has started 
on the creation of a functional case-management system. Hundreds of human remains stored 
at the Pristina morgue, for which all possibilities for forensic action have been exhausted, 
remain unidentified.  
Kosovo’s commitment to maintaining good and constructive bilateral relations in the region 
was put into question by the government’s decision to impose a 100% tax on imports from 
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.   
Kosovo has continued to develop closer relations with Albania. Trade between the two 
increased by slightly above 20% in 2018. A fifth joint government meeting took place in 
November 2018, with cooperation agreements signed in several areas. In December 2018, the 
governments of Kosovo and Albania signed an agreement entailing simplified procedures for 
border crossing and joint border controls. Under a previously signed agreement, a Kosovo 
customs office was opened in the Albanian port of Durrës, in order to simplify procedures for 
imports into Kosovo transiting through Albania. Any decision with respect to the management 
of border control must be in line with IBM standards. 
There has been no change in Kosovo’s formal relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina, which 
does not recognise Kosovo’s independence. A reciprocal visa regime remains in place. 
Relations were negatively affected by Kosovo’s imposition of a 100% tariff on the import of 
goods from Bosnia and Herzegovina in November 2018.  
Kosovo continues to enjoy good relations with Montenegro. The ratification by the Kosovo 
Assembly of the agreement on border/boundary demarcation with Montenegro in March 2018 


===== PAGE 55 =====
 
54 
 
was an important achievement and it came into force in June 2018. An agreement on the 
international transport of passengers and cargo was signed in August 2018. 
There was further progress in relations with North Macedonia. Work on the new 
crossing-point at Stancic-Belanoc started in June 2018. Contacts between government 
officials continued to intensify. Kosovo’s political leaders have welcomed the Prespa 
agreement as a positive contribution to the stability of the region. On 1 June 2018, a protocol 
related to the readmission agreement with North Macedonia entered into force. 
Kosovo has maintained good relations with Turkey and reciprocal high-level visits continue. 
The arrest and forced deportation to Turkey of six Turkish nationals legally residing in 
Kosovo in March 2018 raised serious questions about the respect of due process (See section 
2.2.1 – Judiciary and fundamental rights).  
5. 
NORMALISATION OF RELATIONS BETWEEN KOSOVO AND SERBIA 
In the framework of the EU-facilitated dialogue, work continued with a number of high-level 
meetings led by High Representative/Vice-President Mogherini with Presidents Vučić and 
Thaçi. This new phase aims to conclude a fully comprehensive and legally binding agreement 
between Serbia and Kosovo, in line with international law and EU acquis and acceptable to 
EU Member States and the region. This work was interrupted in November 2018 following 
the decision by the Kosovo government to impose customs tariffs of 100% on imported goods 
from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, on political and economic grounds.  
On the implementation of past agreements, further consolidation has been made on the 
implementation of the April 2013 ‘First agreement of principles governing the 
normalisation of relations’ with the full implementation of the justice agreement which has 
enabled the newly integrated judicial personnel to address the judicial backlog with their 
judicial colleagues.  
Implementation of the 25 August 2015 Agreements has overall remained slow. No progress 
has been made on the Association/Community of Serb majority municipalities and Kosovo 
has yet to engage constructively in its establishment. The energy agreement between Serbia 
and Kosovo must be implemented without further delay in order to avoid this longstanding 
dispute from having further consequences for energy stability and security in Serbia, Kosovo 
and countries across Europe. Following the completion of the registration of Elektrosever, 
Serbia needs to file for the licensing process in Kosovo as a matter of urgency. The works on 
the Mitrovica bridge are completed and the bridge should be opened to vehicle traffic 
without further delay or obstructions. The full implementation of the telecoms agreement has 
enabled the introduction of the new dialling code.   
As regards the Technical Dialogue Agreements (2011-2012), some are not or only partially 
being implemented. Both sides need to remain committed to the continued implementation of 
the agreement on representation and participation of Kosovo in regional forums. The issues 
of cadastre and university diplomas recognition are yet to be solved, as are the licence plate 
related elements of the agreement on freedom of movement. Serbia has yet to address the 
issue of re-located Serbian administrative customs structures with Kosovo denomination that 
operate from within Serbia, and to cease the issuance of documentation or affixing of stamps 
with denomination that contravenes the related agreement. On IBM, the interim common 
crossing points with Serbia continue to be operational. There has been limited progress in 
establishing the six permanent IBM common crossing points between Serbia and Kosovo as 
stipulated in the IBM agreement. Serbia did not engage constructively in starting the 
establishment of these crossing points on the Serbian side (in Jarinje, Mucibabe, and 
Konculj). This led to a suspension of EU funds in July 2018. At those hosted by Kosovo (in 


===== PAGE 56 =====
 
55 
 
Tabavije/Bërnjak, Mutivodë/Mutivode and Merdarë/Merdare), the construction at Tabavije/ 
Bërnjak has never started due to the failure of Belgrade to relocate the electricity pylons to 
allow for construction to commence. At Mutivodë/Mutivode, all cooperation by Serbian 
technical representatives has stopped since March 2018. Finally, the refusal of Serbian 
authorities to vacate the provisional premises of the Merdarë/Merdare crossing point and 
move into the new ones  significantly delays the traffic and puts at risk the implementation of 
EU-funded projects. There has also been no progress in establishing the additional interim 
common crossing points in Kapi/Kapija Vrapce and Rajetici/Izvor. Additional measures need 
to be taken by Serbia to close illegal crossings.  
Requests for mutual legal assistance are in principle being processed. In some instances, 
cooperation by Serbia in high-level investigations has not been forthcoming. Mutual legal 
cooperation is extremely limited in war crimes cases. 
Overall, Kosovo has remained engaged in the dialogue. However, the Kosovo government 
needs to revoke the tariffs on imports from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Kosovo 
needs to make further substantial efforts and contribute to the establishment of a conducive 
environment to the conclusion of a legally binding agreement with Serbia. Such an agreement 
is urgent and crucial so that Kosovo and Serbia can advance on their respective European 
paths. 
6. 
European standards  
6.1 
Free movement of goods  
Kosovo has some level of preparation on the free movement of goods. It made some 
progress during the reporting period on the overall legal framework and some sectoral 
legislation in the “harmonised” area. Inter-institutional coordination to enable the proper 
enforcement of legislation still needs to improve. The capacity of Kosovo's quality 
infrastructure institutions needs to be strengthened. The recommendations in last year’s report 
have been partly addressed and in the coming year, Kosovo should in particular: 
 adopt the outstanding secondary legislation relating to the Laws on standardisation, on 
metrology, on accreditation and on technical requirements for products and conformity 
Assessment;  
 continue to ensure the implementation of the registration, evaluation, authorisation and 
restriction of chemicals (REACH) Regulation. 
General principles 
With regard to the framework for the production, distribution and marketing of industrial 
products, further steps were taken to align with the acquis, including through the adoption in 
March 2018 of the Law on technical requirements for product and conformity assessment. 
The National Programme for Implementation of the SAA sets out the planning for gradual 
approximation with the acquis and its implementation. 
Non-harmonised area 
So far, no action plan is in place to ensure compliance with Articles 34-36 of the Treaty on 
the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU). A new governmental regulation on the 
notification and exchange of information on technical regulations, conformity assessment 
procedures and standards was adopted in January 2019, with a view to harmonising with 
requirements of the acquis. However, the recent Law on consumer protection diverges from 
the acquis, notably as regards labelling, packaging and a declaration requirement, whereby the 


===== PAGE 57 =====
 
56 
 
seller has to indicate the origin of the product by means of a label with the flag of the country 
of origin. 
The Ministry of Trade and Industry is the competent authority for follow-up and 
implementation of Articles 34-36 TFEU, and has been identified as the body responsible for 
the obligation to notify technical regulations, in line with the applicable EU requirements 
and international agreements. 
Harmonised area: quality infrastructure 
In 2018, some outstanding key legislation was adopted, providing a legal basis for technical 
regulations, standards, conformity assessment, accreditation, metrology and market 
surveillance. However, institutional structures need to be strengthened further to fully enforce 
the laws. 
The Kosovo Standardisation Agency has been granted access to selected European standards 
through licensing agreements with the European Committee for Standardisation/European 
Committee for Electro-technical Standardisation (CEN/CENELEC). It adopted 554 European 
standards in the reporting period. However, obstacles limiting online sales of standards still 
need to be addressed.  
Four secondary regulations have been adopted since the entry into force of the Law on 
accreditation in 2017. Kosovo’s accreditation body still needs to address several non-
conformities to meet the necessary requirements for accession to the Multilateral Agreement 
of the European Cooperation for Accreditation. A Director-General was finally appointed in 
November 2018, but the delay disrupted the accreditation process and undermined confidence 
in the accreditation services. There are currently 39 accredited conformity assessment bodies 
in Kosovo (33 test laboratories and 6 inspection bodies), but their capacity and performance 
need to be strengthened.  
Kosovo adopted the Law on metrology in March 2018, as well as secondary legislation 
designed to align with the EU Directives on non-automatic weighing instruments (NAWI), 
pre-packaging and bottles used as measuring containers. Additional secondary legislation on 
metrological procedures needs to be adopted in order to implement the Law and the other 
acts. The shortage of qualified staff and equipment undermines full implementation of these 
laws and regulations in several sectors. The Kosovo Metrology Agency is a liaison 
organisation, pending associate member status, of the European Association of National 
Metrology Institutes (EURAMET) and has taken steps to become an associate member of the 
International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM). 
The main legal basis for market surveillance consists of the Law on Technical Requirements 
for Products and Conformity Assessment and the Law on General Product Safety, designed to 
be aligned with the acquis. However, the market surveillance bodies fail to enforce the laws 
due to a lack of resources and structural weaknesses. The fact that the market inspectorates act 
at both community and central level renders coordination difficult. Inter-institutional 
monitoring has slightly improved with the establishment of the Coordination Body for Market 
Surveillance and the launch of the on-going inspection reform.  
In 2018, a total of 304 product safety inspections identified 16 harmful products, including 3 
types with serious risks; all harmful products were subsequently permanently withdrawn from 
the market. 


===== PAGE 58 =====
 
57 
 
Harmonised area: sectoral legislation 
On the “New and Global Approach” product legislation, Kosovo adopted legislation to 
increase its alignment with the acquis on construction products. However, lack of capacity in 
the quality infrastructure prevents its full implementation. 
There has been some progress on alignment with the acquis on “Old Approach” product 
legislation and procedural measures. Kosovo adopted legislation designed to increase 
alignment with the acquis on pre-packaging and bottles used as measuring containers and on 
textile labelling and mixtures. It has started aligning and further strengthening its 
administrative capacities to ensure effective implementation of the REACH Regulation.  
6.2 
Movement of persons, services and right of establishment 
Kosovo is moderately prepared for the free movement of persons, services and the right of 
establishment. Some progress was made by enforcing the notification procedure and 
compliance assessment of draft normative acts falling under the scope of the Law on services. 
The recommendations in last year’s report have been addressed only partially.  
Over the coming year, Kosovo should in particular:  
 remove the identified barriers to the free movement of services, by implementing the 
action plan for the full implementation of the Law on Services;  
 align with the acquis on mutual recognition of professional qualifications;  
 continue to align with the acquis on postal services and further open the postal market. 
On movement of persons, regarding access to the labour market, the Ministry of Labour and 
Social Welfare has issued 343 labour certificates for periods of 90 days to foreign citizens 
over the reporting period. On the coordination of social security systems, the Kosovo 
Assembly ratified the Social Security Agreements with Belgium and Switzerland in October 
2018. Kosovo has well-functioning agreements with Montenegro and North Macedonia on 
confirmation of social security periods.  
On the freedom to provide services, the Law on services complies only partly with the 
Services Directive and is not aligned with the provisions on cross-border services and 
administrative cooperation. Following last year's screening of sectoral legislation, a five-year 
action plan for the full implementation of the Law on services was adopted in July 2018. It 
involves amending 54 pieces of sectoral legislation (25 primary and 29 secondary acts) in 
order to remove outstanding restrictions to the free movement of services by 2022. In March 
2018, the government established a notification procedure to ensure that draft normative acts 
comply with the Law on services. It obliges competent authorities to seek a positive legal 
opinion prior to passing any future draft legislation falling under the scope of the Law on 
services. Finally, secondary law provides for the establishment of a Point of Single Contact by 
the Ministry of Trade and Industry in 2019, to facilitate access to service activities and 
provide service providers with the information they need. In the coming year, Kosovo should 
launch a test phase for a fully functioning Point of Single Contact. 
On the right of establishment, general registration in the Kosovo business registry is binding 
for any individual or company wishing to do business. In a number of regulated professions 
such as law and auditing, there is a need to enrol in a separate sectoral registry or association. 
Foreign service providers are allowed to offer services if they establish an office in Kosovo.  


===== PAGE 59 =====
 
58 
 
Kosovo has gradually aligned its legal framework on postal services with the acquis. In 
December 2018, a new Law on postal services was adopted by the Assembly, which is partly 
aligned with the EU postal acquis. Secondary legislation for the technical implementation of 
the law and a timetable to move forward with the legislative process should follow. 30% of 
the territory is still not covered by the universal postal service. The weight limit for the 
reserved area is still 100 grams. There are plans to fully liberalise the postal market by 2021.  
On the mutual recognition of professional qualifications, the Law on the regulated 
professions in Kosovo, as adopted in October 2016, is to a certain degree aligned with the 
acquis, but still needs further harmonisation. The acquis harmonises rules on regulated 
professions to ensure the mutual recognition of qualifications and diplomas between Member 
States. It identifies 16 professions as “regulated”, the so-called sectoral professions, (e.g. 
doctors, dentists, pharmacists, veterinary surgeons, midwifes, nurses and architects), for 
which the Directive prescribes minimum harmonised training and sets out some generic 
criteria for accessing and exercising them. The secondary legislation has yet to be adopted. In 
2018, as part of its restructuring, the Ministry of Education established a Division for 
Examinations and Regulated Professions, which will be responsible for organising state 
exams and for establishing procedures to access regulated professions. 
Building on the progress made, Kosovo needs to continue developing the necessary structures 
and rules for the recognition of professional qualifications obtained abroad, in order to 
guarantee and facilitate the mobility of professionals and services. 
6.3 
Free movement of capital  
Kosovo has some level of preparation in this area. Some progress was made on payment 
services, with the entry into force of an amending regulation on charges for such services. 
Previous report recommendations on the equal treatment of EU nationals acquiring real 
estate in Kosovo and on increased efforts to fight economic and financial crime, have not 
yet been addressed.  
In the coming year, Kosovo should therefore:  
 take concrete steps to grant national treatment to EU nationals acquiring real estate in 
Kosovo, in line with the SAA; 
 increase efforts to fight economic and financial crime and align the Law on the 
prevention of money laundering and terrorist financing with the acquis. 
On capital movements and payments, the movement of capital remains largely free in 
Kosovo, with no restrictions on foreign ownership or on investment in the financial sector. 
Use of the International Bank Account Number (IBAN) is mandatory for both domestic and 
cross-border payments and functions well. The execution of payments and money transfers 
is limited to banking and non-banking financial institutions licensed by the Central Bank of 
Kosovo to perform such activities. 
The government has started to address the issue of real estate acquisition by foreigners 
focusing on the rights of EU nationals. A proposal to amend the relevant legislation is 
scheduled for 2019. 
On payment systems, amendments to the Regulation on the interbank payment system that 
entered into force in August 2018 prohibit the charging of fees for local incoming transfers 
processed through the interbank payment system. 
On the prevention of money laundering and terrorist financing, the authorities conducted 
one general and three sectoral risk assessments in the construction and gambling sector and 


===== PAGE 60 =====
 
59 
 
on non-profit organisations. The Law on the prevention of money laundering and terrorist 
financing complies only partly with the acquis and Financial Action Task Force 
recommendations. Inter-institutional cooperation in the fight against economic and financial 
crime must be strengthened to ensure the proper investigation and prosecution of offences 
(See also section 2.2.2 - Justice, Freedom and Security). 
6.4. 
Financial services  
Kosovo is moderately prepared in the area of financial services. Some progress was made 
in the implementation of last year’s recommendations with the adoption of the Law on 
accounting, financial reporting and auditing.   
In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular:  
 fully implement and enforce Solvency I measures; start to  implement Solvency  II 
measures; 
 advance on the incorporation of the Basel III framework (capital requirements Regulation 
and Directive) and start aligning the legal framework on microfinance institutions and 
non-bank financial institutions with the acquis; 
 improve inter-institutional coordination to address the issue of uninsured, unregistered 
vehicles.  
On banks and financial conglomerates, some additional progress has been made in 
implementing the legislation on banking supervision, which aims to strengthen corporate 
governance and the management of credit risk. The European Central Bank’s single 
supervisory mechanism and the Central Bank of Kosovo signed a memorandum of 
understanding in December 2018 aimed mainly at facilitating cooperation and the exchange 
of information in the field of banking supervision. The Central Bank of Kosovo needs to 
ensure that consumers are adequately protected and to prevent unfair banking practices. 
Kosovo still needs to establish an independent recovery and resolution authority. Potential 
changes to the Law on banks to grant this function to the Central Bank must guarantee that the 
authority operates with full functional independence within the Central Bank. On the 
harmonisation of the regulatory framework with Basel II and EU standards, the chapter on 
risk-weighted exposure amounts for credit risk has yet to be adopted. The Central Bank 
requires banks to maintain a minimum capital adequacy ratio of 12%. The capitalisation level 
of banks is considered stable and well above the required minimum capital adequacy ratio. 
The Assembly adopted the Law on accounting, financial reporting and auditing in March 
2018. The legislation on microfinance institutions and non-bank financial institutions is not 
yet in line with the acquis. 
The Central Bank is Kosovo’s sole authority on insurance and occupational pensions, with 
full competence for licensing, regulating and supervising insurance companies and 
occupational pension funds. Solvency I measures need to be fully implemented and enforced 
and the implementation of Solvency II should start. While the insurance Law is aligned with 
the acquis on the exercise and pursuit of the business of insurance, reinsurance and insurance 
mediation, the oversight and supervision of occupational pension funds needs to be improved. 
Stronger inter-institutional coordination is required to address the issue of uninsured, 
unregistered vehicles. As Kosovo is still not part of the ‘green card’ system, vehicle insurance 
is still required for foreign-registered vehicles entering Kosovo and vehicles with Kosovo 
plates leaving Kosovo. This is not the case for countries with which Kosovo has bilateral 
vehicle insurance arrangements. The online sale of border insurance policies started in May 


===== PAGE 61 =====
 
60 
 
2018 as a way of simplifying procedures, but it remains a financial burden for frequent 
travellers.  
On securities markets and investment services, market development is at an early stage and 
there is no activity relating to undertakings for collective investment. Activity focuses on the 
government securities market. The Central Bank of Kosovo auctions government securities 
and maintains records, which are stored and processed electronically in the central depository 
securities system. 
6.5. 
Customs  
Kosovo is moderately prepared in the area of customs. There has been some progress, 
notably in enforcing customs measures for the protection of intellectual property rights 
(IPRs). The recommendations in last year’s report have not been fully addressed and in the 
coming year, Kosovo should in particular: 
 further align customs legislation, including the customs and excise code, with the 
Union customs code and the excise acquis;  
 step up coordination between Kosovo Customs, law enforcement agencies and other 
relevant institutions on fighting the informal economy and customs fraud. 
In the area of customs legislation, the customs and excise code is largely aligned with the 
Union customs code, but further alignment is still needed. Kosovo has formally applied to 
become an observer in the Common Transit Convention. It has not ratified the Regional 
Convention on Pan-Euro-Mediterranean preferential rules of origin but it applies its 
provisions. Kosovo Customs continues to participate in the system for the exchange of excise 
data, which provides for the systematic electronic exchange of data among Western Balkan 
economies. The legislation on drug precursors, customs measures governing IPRs and export 
controls for cultural goods is still not fully aligned with the acquis. Some progress was made 
on procedures for authorised economic operators, but further harmonisation is still needed on 
customs security aspects. Inland customs terminals located in privately owned facilities 
charge a fee to every truck entering the terminal to discharge customs obligations. Such fees 
are not in line with the acquis.   
The customs administration continued to maintain reasonable administrative and 
operational capacity; customs revenues in 2018 were 1.2% higher than in 2017. As regards 
administrative and technical development, Kosovo should consider applying to participate in 
the Customs 2020 programme, which focuses directly on implementing Union law and policy 
in the field of customs. Kosovo Customs’ paperless approach and e-payments system have 
helped to eliminate bureaucratic administrative barriers, leading to a streamlining of customs 
clearance procedures.  
Customs’ performance in the fight against illegal cross-border activities, including the 
smuggling of goods, such as narcotics and hazardous materials, continues to show progress. 
Further efforts are needed to address corruption more effectively, including by conducting 
more investigations and strengthening checks on asset declarations filled by customs officials. 
The professional capacity of the customs department dealing with IPRs is improving. In the 
reporting period, Kosovo Customs stepped up efforts to fight IPR infringements. The level of 
informality in the economy is still high and further coordination efforts are needed between 
relevant institutions and law enforcement bodies to fight the informal economy and customs 
fraud. Further efforts are also required to address the backlog of unresolved complaints 
against the customs administration in the fiscal division of the Basic Court in Pristina.  


===== PAGE 62 =====
 
61 
 
Kosovo and Albania signed an agreement entailing simplified procedures for border crossing 
and the elimination of double controls. On the basis of a previously signed agreement a 
Kosovo customs office was opened in the Albanian port of Durrës in order to simplify 
procedures for imports into Kosovo transiting through Albania.  
6.6 
Taxation  
Kosovo has some level of preparation in the area of taxation. There was some progress 
in collecting tax revenues, reducing the grey economy, further aligning secondary tax 
legislation and concluding new double-taxation agreements (DTAs). However, the 
decision to introduce a discriminatory excise rate for cigarettes represents a clear violation 
of the SAA. Last year’s recommendations were partially implemented and in the coming 
year, Kosovo should in particular:  
 withdraw the decision on discriminatory excises on cigarettes to bring the legislation 
into line with the SAA; 
 systematically implement the strategy for combating the informal economy, money 
laundering, financing of terrorism and financial crime (2019-2023) and its action plan;  
 increase cooperation with the existing judiciary framework to ensure timely 
adjudication of tax evasion and fraud cases, and reduce the backlog of unresolved 
complaints against the Tax Administration in the fiscal division of the Basic Court in 
Pristina. 
On indirect taxation, the value-added tax (VAT) system is broadly aligned with the acquis. 
Kosovo’s standard rate of 18% and reduced rate of 8% are in line with the acquis, but the 
application of the latter to supplies and imports of IT equipment is not. Following the June 
2018 shift to a risk-based approach to refunding VAT, there has been progress in limiting the 
average time for a refund to less than 30 days. VAT reimbursement for goods contained in the 
personal luggage of travellers residing outside Kosovo is still not aligned with the relevant EU 
Directives. As regards excises, the government adopted a decision introducing a 
discriminatory rate for cigarettes, in clear violation of the SAA. The authorities should 
develop a plan for the tax treatment of evaporation and other kinds of material loss during the 
transportation, production or storage of excise goods. On direct taxation, transfer pricing 
between enterprises under common ownership or control is in line with OECD guidelines for 
agreements on the elimination of double taxation.  
On administrative cooperation and mutual legal assistance, Kosovo signed one more DTA 
with Austria in 2018, bringing the total number of DTAs to 14 (11 of which had entered into 
force by 2018). It should consider adopting the standards enshrined in the OECD/Council of 
Europe Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters.  
On operational capacity and computerisation, modernisation of the tax authorities’ internal 
IT platform (and the utilisation of electronic services) should continue. There has been some 
progress in reducing the informal grey economy, and overall tax revenue collection in 2018 
increased by 10.2% compared to 2017 due to higher tax compliance and tax debt collection. A 
revised strategy and action plan to combat informal economy introducing qualitative and 
quantitative indicators to better monitor the progress was adopted in May 2019. The Kosovo 
Tax Administration has developed a good taxpayer service focus, in particular with the 
widespread use of e-filing and e-payment systems. Field inspections increased, with the 
Administration conducting 306 anti-tax evasion operations at 17 locations in 2018. Tax 
evasion to the value of over EUR 7 million was found in the same period. However, tax 
evasion and informality continue to hamper the economy and further efforts are needed, in 


===== PAGE 63 =====
 
62 
 
particular on risk-based field inspections and inter-institutional cooperation. The tax 
administration should further strengthen its administrative and professional capacity and 
ensure merit-based and transparent selection processes. Financial intermediaries are only 
required to inform the tax authority about recipients of savings income only when asked. 
Allegations of serious tax fraud need to be properly investigated. Additional efforts are 
needed to address further the backlog of unresolved complaints against the tax administration 
in the fiscal division of the Basic Court in Pristina.  
6.7 
Competition 
Kosovo is at an early stage on competition. Some progress was made with further legislative 
alignment and the development of the institutional capacities of the Kosovo Competition 
Authority. However, the Authority faces challenges as regards its investigative and decision-
making capacity. In the area of state aid, significant efforts are needed to improve legislative 
alignment and enforcement. The State Aid Commission, whose members were appointed in 
March 2019, needs to become operational.  
As last year's recommendations remain largely unaddressed, Kosovo should pay particular 
attention in the coming year to:  
 ensure the functional capacity and operational independence of the competition and state 
aid institutions and increase cooperation and coordination between relevant ministries, 
institutions and stakeholders; 
 complete the alignment of secondary legislation on competition and state aid and ensure 
its enforcement; 
 fulfil SAA obligations regarding the state aid schemes inventory and public undertakings. 
Antitrust and mergers 
The legislative framework is broadly aligned with Article 101 (restrictive agreements) and 
Article 102 (abuse of a dominant position) TFEU. The legal framework is in place for the 
Kosovo Competition Authority to control antitrust and mergers. Amendments to the Law on 
competition are being prepared in line with the acquis. In addition, further progress was made 
by adopting secondary legislation relating to antitrust, notably several administrative 
instructions. 
On the institutional framework, the Kosovo Competition Authority is responsible for 
implementing competition law. The Authority is governed by the Kosovo Competition 
Commission, a collegial decision-making body appointed by the Assembly. Formally, the 
Authority has powers to initiate investigations, conduct on-site inspections, impose fines and 
remedies and prohibit anti-competitive mergers. However, cooperation, reporting and 
coordination with government institutions, regulators and ministries should be strengthened.  
As regards its capacity to enforce legislation, the Authority has adequate staffing and an 
adequate budget. The team requires appropriate training to handle cases more efficiently and 
implement competition rules effectively. Judges and court staff dealing with competition 
cases and merger control still lack adequate expertise in this field.  
Additional progress was made on implementation, notably on the adoption of decisions on 
anti-competitive agreements, abuse of dominant position and mergers. The Kosovo 
Competition Commission issued 10 professional opinions in 2018. However, awareness 
raising and understanding of competition policy among staff and especially judges needs to be 
stepped up significantly.  


===== PAGE 64 =====
 
63 
 
State aid 
The legislative framework is largely in line with the acquis. The Law on state aid is broadly 
aligned with Articles 107 and 108 TFEU. A Regulation on Procedures and Forms of State Aid 
Notification was adopted in October 2018.  
As regards the institutional framework, the members of the State Aid Commission, 
responsible for implementing state aid control, were appointed in March 2019. Formally, the 
State Aid Department in the Ministry of Finance has the power to verify notified aid 
measures, prohibit aid, carry out ex post control of aid and recover incompatible aid. 
However, its capacity to enforce the law remained inadequate over much of the reporting 
period. As a result, there has been no effective enforcement. The State Aid Department has 
not adopted any decisions on state aid in the last five years and has been devoted to drafting 
secondary legislation. The Department did not have the capacity to screen existing aid 
schemes and establish a comprehensive inventory of aid schemes by the SAA deadline (April 
2019). Moreover, the identification of granting authorities is still ongoing, hindering ex ante 
notifications and ex post control. A number of aid measures, granted at central or local level, 
in particular to large companies in various sectors (e.g. telecommunications) are not notified 
or properly investigated. Awareness of state aid rules among aid grantors is very weak and 
must be improved significantly.  
Liberalisation  
The Law on competition and the Law on state aid are applicable to public undertakings in 
Kosovo. The rules on financing services of general economic interest are partly in line with 
the acquis. Monopolies of a commercial nature within the meaning of Article 37 TFEU exist 
in Kosovo. The exclusive agreement with a private company regarding mandatory vehicle 
homologation for all imported cars raises concerns. 
6.8 
Public Procurement 
Kosovo has some level of preparation in public procurement. Some progress was achieved 
with the further rollout of the electronic procurement platform. However, more efforts to 
prevent irregularities and corruption during the procurement cycle are necessary. Kosovo still 
needs to address the weak capacity of public procurement institutions to administer public 
procurement, the insufficient monitoring and enforcement of contracts and the weak remedy 
systems, which are all vulnerable to corruption.  
As most of last year’s recommendations remain valid in the coming year, Kosovo should in 
particular:  
 further align its legislation with the acquis on public procurement, including on public-
private partnerships and concessions, and ensure proper implementation of the Law on 
public procurement;  
 ensure that the Procurement Review Body (PRB) board is fully operational, and that staff 
capacity limitations are addressed;  
 increase the capacity of all public procurement institutions and the cooperation between 
them to ensure consistent implementation of the public procurement regulatory 
framework. 
Institutional set up and legal alignment  
Kosovo's legal framework on public procurement is broadly aligned with the 2004 EU 
Directives on classical and utilities procurement and on concessions and public-private 
partnerships. Further alignment with the 2014 EU Directive, including on public-private 


===== PAGE 65 =====
 
64 
 
partnerships and concessions, is still required. Relevant principles such as the best price-
quality ratio and full product life-cycle costs are not implemented, as they are not reflected in 
the relevant secondary legislation. Kosovo’s legal framework has not yet been aligned with 
the EU defence procurement Directive. All legal and financial instruments used in the area of 
public procurement and concessions, including inter-governmental agreements concluded 
with third countries, should reflect the principles of transparency, competition, equal 
treatment and non-discrimination.  
Kosovo has a strategy (2017-2021) and action plan (2017-2019) to improve the public 
procurement system. However, there are no arrangements to assess its implementation. Key 
objectives of public procurement are also reflected in the 2016-2020 Public Finance 
Management Strategy. Concrete steps, coordinated activities and timelines for the 
implementation of the strategy and the action plan are lacking.  
The public procurement institutions consist of three main bodies. The Public Procurement 
Regulatory Commission is responsible for the overall coordination and supervision of the 
public procurement system and training. The Central Procurement Agency, under the Ministry 
of Finance, is in charge of central and coordinated purchases. The PRB examines all 
allegations of breaches to the public procurement law. These institutions need to coordinate 
more and face up to major challenges in exercising their functions and duties effectively and 
efficiently. 
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
In 2018, the public procurement share accounted for 9.4% of GDP (EUR 631.6 million). Of 
this, 89% was awarded using an open procedure. However, 99% of public contracts were 
awarded according to the lowest-price criterion, rather than best price-quality ratio in line 
with the EU Directive on public procurement. Prices for the same items differ widely between 
contracting authorities. The fact that the contracting authorities lack the capacity to draft 
proper technical specifications, undermines the quality, efficiency, transparency and effective 
implementation and oversight of the procurement cycle. 
All 188 contracting authorities at central and local level have to use the e-procurement system 
for any type of procurement activity. Since January 2019, the electronic submission of bids is 
mandatory for all procurement types and values, and physical submission is no longer 
allowed. Continuous training is required to develop the ability of both bidders (especially 
SMEs) and buyers to use e-procurement. Around 6,000 economic operators and 15,000 users 
are currently registered and actively using the e-procurement system. 
Centralised procurement is mandatory for 14 categories of goods and services listed by the 
Ministry of Finance and applies to agencies with fewer than 50 employees that are 
accountable to the Assembly. However, the Central Procurement Agency's staff and other 
resources are not sufficient to meet demand. 
Monitoring of central purchasing activities remains particularly important due to their high 
value and complexity. Significant delays in the procurements undertaken by the Central 
Procurement Agency hampered its operations. The latter failed to conduct transparent, 
efficient and economically advantageous procurements through centralised procedures to 
secure budget savings. The shortcomings stem from poor planning and a failure by 
contracting authorities to conduct market research. Inadequate analysis and collection of data 
adds to the poor execution of contracts. The sole use of the ‘lowest price’ criterion when 
procuring supplies might lead to higher life-cycle costs and poor quality purchases. 
Monitoring of contract management and implementation is deficient.  
Efficient remedies system  


===== PAGE 66 =====
 
65 
 
The regulatory framework and institutional arrangements are in place for the review of public 
procurement, including public-private partnerships. The provisions of the Law on public 
procurement on the scope of the review and remedies systems, the time limits for challenging 
decisions, the effects of filing a complaint and the mechanism for ensuring the effectiveness 
of contracts, are broadly in line with the acquis.  
By October 2018, the PRB had received 614 complaints and reviewed 521 appeals. Its 
decisions are published on its webpage, but its database is not user-friendly.  
Economic operators have the right to ask the PRB to review their complaints. In the event of 
non-compliance with its decisions, the PRB has the power to impose fines on contracting 
authorities. Four such penalties were imposed in 2018.  
The PRB is not complete, as two of its five board members have been suspended since June 
2017, due to their indictment in a corruption case. Its staff consists of 18 civil servants and a 
number of external experts. Its decisions, which are made by the board, lack developed and 
consistent reasoning and are not always enforced. 
6.9 
Company law  
Kosovo has some level of preparation in the area of company law. Good progress was 
made on the 2018 recommendations through the adoption of the new Law on business 
organisations and the entry into force of the Law on accounting, financial reporting and 
audit. Legislative changes continued to provide a more favourable environment for 
businesses.     
In the coming year, Kosovo should pay particular attention to:  
 ensure the proper implementation of the recently adopted Law on business 
organisations and of the Law on accounting, financial reporting and audit and ensure 
further alignment in these areas. 
On company law, the Law on business organisations (adopted in May 2018), is partly aligned 
with the acquis. It outlines the role and responsibilities of the Kosovo Business Registration 
Agency (KBRA) and includes some provisions on cross-border mergers, protection for 
employees, minority shareholders as well as creditors in domestic mergers and divisions. It 
also provides for the adoption of a corporate governance code. The KBRA is responsible for 
online business registrations and publications, including company financial statements. 
Businesses can be registered electronically. Further alignment with the company law acquis is 
necessary, including on the minimum capital requirement, shareholder rights, and company 
takeovers.    
In the field of corporate accounting and auditing, the new Law on accounting, financial 
reporting and audit was adopted in April 2018 entered into force in January 2019. It is partly 
aligned with the acquis and regulates, inter alia, the responsibilities of the competent 
authorities, audit requirements, qualifications and the licensing of accountants and auditors. 
Large entities must apply International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS/IAS). The 
requirement for SMEs to apply the IFRSs for SMEs goes beyond the requirements of the EU 
accounting Directive. The institutional audit oversight structures need to be strengthened, as 
do the professional independence and objectivity of auditors and audit firms. A sustainable, 
long-term solution should be found for the financing of the Public Oversight Board.  
6.10 
Intellectual property law 
Kosovo has some level of preparation in this area. Some progress was made in aligning the 
legal framework with the acquis. The Industrial Property Agency and the Office of Copyright 


===== PAGE 67 =====
 
66 
 
and Related Rights lack adequate funding, staff and training. Significant efforts are still 
needed to ensure implementation, including effective means of enforcing Intellectual Property 
Rights (IPRs), in line with SAA obligations.  
In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular:  
 take concrete steps to increase the capacity and coordination of law enforcement agencies 
to enforce intellectual, industrial and commercial property rights and further align with the 
acquis;  
 address the lack of resources of the Industrial Property Agency and deal with the backlog 
of applications for IPRs; 
 raise awareness of the protection of industrial property rights. 
On copyright and related rights, two legal acts were adopted in 2018 regarding mediation of 
disputes and private copy levies. Mechanisms to issue fees for usage of copyrighted material 
between collective management organisations and broadcasters are still needed. Kosovo 
committed to guarantee, within five years of the entry into force of the SAA, a level of 
protection of intellectual, industrial and commercial property rights, equivalent to that applied 
in the EU. This obligation is far from being met.  
On industrial property rights, the legislative framework still needs to be further aligned 
with the acquis, including on trade secrets. Some progress was made in reducing the backlog 
of applications for IPRs. The Industrial Property Agency continues to be affected by 
understaffing and insufficient funding. There is a need for a government strategy on IPRs. 
More awareness raising is needed among IPR holders and users, mainly in the business 
community. The Agency’s industrial property automation system database is not yet fully 
operational. 
On enforcement, Kosovo has established the necessary institutions, including at Kosovo 
Customs, Kosovo Police, the Market Inspectorate and the Kosovo Prosecutorial and Judicial 
Councils. There is a lack of cooperation between policymaking institutions and enforcement 
institutions, such as judiciary and prosecution. In 2018, Kosovo Customs carried out 370 
operations targeting goods that breach IPRs – these concerned 208,841 items worth around 
EUR 2.6 million. In 364 cases (concerning 203,504 items worth around EUR 2.4 million) 
action had been brought by the right holders. The remaining 6 operations (5,337 items worth 
EUR 172,075), were undertaken proactively ex officio by customs officials. The value of the 
goods seized was EUR 2.4 million. Overall, the customs department dealing with IPRs needs 
to be strengthened, as it comprises only two staff members. Capacity-building, cooperation 
with law enforcement bodies and awareness raising are also needed to implement the recently 
adopted Law on customs measures for the protection of IPRs. An administrative requirement 
to obtain police authorisation prior to the conduct of market investigations undermines the 
effectiveness of the market inspectorate. Mechanisms are still needed whereby collective 
management organisations and broadcasters can determine the fees for using copyrighted 
material. This situation has not changed since at least 2014. 
6.11 
Social policy and employment 
Kosovo is at an early stage of preparation on social policy and employment. There was no 
progress during the reporting period. The Employment Agency is now operational but its 
ability to deliver services is limited. Fatal incidents at work are increasing and the General 
Collective Agreement is still not implemented.  
As most of the 2018 recommendations have not been implemented, Kosovo should in 
particular: 


===== PAGE 68 =====
 
67 
 
 implement the 2018-2022 strategy for employment and social welfare, and monitor their 
results;  
 amend and enforce the Law on Labour, legislation on health and safety at work and the 
Law on Economic Social Council; 
 as a matter of urgency, take measures to reduce workplace accidents. 
Kosovo still needs to amend the Law on labour to align it with the EU acquis and improve 
its implementation, which is undermined by the low number of inspectors and lengthy court 
procedures. Implementation is most problematic in the private sector. According to the latest 
data from April 2019, 49.5% of children are registered as benefiting from social assistance, 
whereas for children with special needs, this is roughly 10%. As many as 10.7% of children in 
Kosovo are involved in work, of whom 6.8% work in hazardous conditions. The problem is 
particularly pronounced in the Roma and Ashkali communities. Nevertheless, in the reporting 
period, the labour inspectorate did not report a single case of minors engaged in work. Only 
10% of children with disabilities benefit from the appropriate access to health, education and 
social services.   
On health and safety at work, Kosovo’s legal framework covers to some extent specific 
areas which are regulated by EU Directives. Despite existing health and safety at work rules, 
there has been an increase in the number of fatalities related to workplace accidents from 14 
in 2017 to 21 in 2018. The labour inspectorate does not follow up on these cases properly and 
there are concerns as to the accuracy of data on workplace accidents and occupational 
diseases, and the under-reporting of fatalities. This undermines the effective planning and 
targeting of preventive measures and workplace inspections. As the majority of reported fatal 
accidents took place in the construction sector, the labour inspectorate should target this 
sector more effectively. The number of inspectors increased slightly in 2018, but remains 
insufficient. 
On social dialogue, the 2014 General Collective Agreement, which is fundamental in laying 
down employers’ and employees’ rights and obligations, is not being implemented. The 
Economic Social Council has started negotiations on a new Agreement instead. The 
amendments to the Law on the Economic Social Council, aiming at improving the capacities 
of the Economic Social Council, its decision-making process and overall performance, have 
not yet been adopted. Trade union rights, in particular in the private sector, are under pressure.  
On employment policy, the government did not take substantial steps to implement the 2018-
2022 sector strategy and the action plan to tackle youth unemployment. The budget 
earmarked for active labour market measures albeit increasing, remains insufficient and still a 
large part comes from the donor community. The Employment Agency is operational but has 
limited capacity to provide services, such as effective and efficient active labour market 
measures. The Agency is participating in a bench-learning exercise based on the experience 
developed by the European public employment services network. 
High inactivity and very low employment remain among the key challenges. The overall 
activity rate stood at 40.9% in 2018 and the employment rate was low, at 28.8%. In addition, 
unemployment was still very high, at 29.6% in 2018. It continues to be higher for women 
(33.4%) than for men (28.5%). The employment rate for women is only 12.3%, compared to 
45.3% for men. Only 25.5% of the employed have permanent work contracts, while 74.5% 
work on temporary contracts. Unemployment is most prevalent among young people (15-24 
years), of whom 55.4% are unemployed. Rates of unemployment are even higher, above 90%, 
in the Roma and Ashkali communities. The members of these communities usually work in 
the informal sector, holding insecure, low-skill and low-status jobs. Only few are registered as 


===== PAGE 69 =====
 
68 
 
unemployed. 
There were no developments as regards preparations for the use of the European Social 
Fund (ESF). 
On social inclusion and protection, Kosovo has a legal and institutional framework for 
social service delivery but limited financial resources and human capacities and a lack of 
proper planning by public institutions (in particular municipalities) result in inadequate 
provision of social services to the most vulnerable population. This is aggravated by a general 
lack of data collection on population numbers broken down by gender, age groups, ethnicity, 
ability and vulnerability.  
Municipalities are unwilling to allocate sustainable and long-term financing to the provision 
of social services. A provision earmarking specific funding from the general grant for social 
services should be included in the upcoming draft Law on local finance. This grant, to be 
implemented through a specific financial formula, is aimed at improving the funding and 
long-term sustainability of social service delivery by the public and non-governmental sector. 
Municipal authorities have made limited progress in adopting three-year social housing plans 
and this had prevented the central authorities from concluding a Kosovo-wide strategy on 
social housing. 
Overall spending on social protection has risen significantly in recent years, mainly because 
of increases in pensions and war-related benefits. Furthermore, the expansion of programmes 
targeting specific population groups have crowded out spending of the social assistance 
targeting the poor, which is both low and declining. In November 2018, the Assembly 
approved the Law on social enterprises, which aims to promote employment among socially 
vulnerable categories.  
On social inclusion, the municipalities do not have an integrated interdepartmental approach 
to service coverage, so as to take appropriate account of the needs of the most vulnerable 
groups, in particular children. Kosovo needs to ensure that children with disabilities are able 
to attend public schools alongside their peers. Despite poor labour market outcomes among 
marginalised Roma and Ashkali communities, Kosovo’s latest revised action plan on the 
integration of these communities does not include measures specifically targeting these 
communities in active labour market policies, as is usual in the region. The proportion of the 
budget allocated to promoting their inclusion in employment is also low. Increasing female 
participation in the labour market, including among women from marginalised communities, 
should be a priority. The proportion of Kosovo’s population living below the poverty line has 
been decreasing, but it is still high, at 17.6%. The General Council for Social and Family 
Policy, in charge of licensing providers of social services, including foster care, has not been 
functioning effectively. There has been no progress in licensing new providers of foster care 
for children in need. 
As for non-discrimination in employment and social policy, secondary legislation for the 
implementation of the Law on Protection from Discrimination has not been adopted. The 
authorities must address discrimination against women, especially as regards hiring 
procedures in the private sector. In the reporting period, the Ombudsperson received a similar 
volume of cases as in previous years, but the number of ex officio investigations on 
discrimination grounds has doubled. Institutions continue to perform poorly in processing and 
investigating cases of discrimination. 
On equality between women and men, women continue to experience various forms of 
gender discrimination. Kosovo should reform the system of maternity and parental leave, 
which presents an obstacle to the hiring of women, particularly in the private sector. Limited 


===== PAGE 70 =====
 
69 
 
access to child care and to flexible work arrangements are also considered barriers to 
women’s employment, as formal options for care beyond maternity leave are limited, and 
family-friendly schedules are often not available. 
6.12 
Consumer and health protection 
Kosovo is at an early stage of preparation in this area. There has been limited progress on 
consumer protection, notably by adopting the Law on consumer protection.  
In the coming year Kosovo should: 
 increase the involvement of civil society on consumer protection and consumer rights and  
adopt the necessary secondary legislation for the enforcement of the Law on consumer 
protection and coordinated market surveillance;  
 allocate more financial resources to health, to allow implementation of the health sector 
reforms, including further roll-out of the electronic public health information system and 
to meet overall recommendations for funding health systems. 
The Law on consumer protection (adopted in June 2018) aims to regulate market conditions 
in consumer-business relations, product labelling, price indicators, consumer protection in 
relation to contracts and the administrative and judicial protection of consumers. It is designed 
to align Kosovo legislation partly with the acquis, except for the mortgage credit Directive. 
However, the Law diverges from the acquis, notably on labelling, packaging and a declaration 
requirement that obliges the seller to indicate the origin of a product by means of a label with 
the flag of the country of origin. A total of 11 pieces of secondary legislation need to be 
adopted within a year of the Law’s adoption in order for it to be enforceable. Enforcement 
practices have not yet been specified. The Central Bank needs to develop a complete 
framework for consumer credit.  
The new Law provides a legal basis for the advisory role of civil society organisations. The 
review of consumer complaints is not working properly due to lack of coordination among the 
various authorities in charge, which leads to difficulties in the assessment of complaints. 
With regard to issues relating to product safety, the Law on technical requirements for 
products and conformity assessment (approved in March 2018) further aligns the legislative 
framework with the acquis on the marketing of products and is designed to be fully aligned 
with the acquis on market surveillance. It lays down a more transparent and efficient system 
for market surveillance and supervision. 
No developments were noted on non-safety related issues. Although the Law on consumer 
protection addresses consumers’ economic interest, it is not properly enforced due to 
understaffing Consumer Protection Department and weak consumer organisations. 
On public health policy, the Law on health insurance has not yet been amended. 
Implementation of the communication strategy in support of the Law has been further 
delayed. The start of premium collection has been further postponed.  
The first semi-annual monitoring and evaluation report on the implementation of the 
2017-2021 action plan for the health sector strategy was adopted in November 2018. No 
progress was registered in areas identified in the health sector strategy as shortcomings: low 
levels of productivity of health institutions, lack of reliable data and lack of adequate funding 
for monitoring. Around 20% of the population have no access to health services due to 
extreme poverty. High level of private expenditure (estimated at 40 % of total medical costs) 
mean that the most vulnerable groups are disproportionately affected. 


===== PAGE 71 =====
 
70 
 
Public spending on health should be further increased. In January 2019, it was estimated that 
60%, up from 40 % in 2016 of annual public healthcare needs were covered. The allocated 
funds are used mainly to cover fixed costs, leaving less for direct patient costs (diagnosis, 
treatment, and prevention). Health financing continues to be predominantly based on 
historical expenditure. Institutional accountability has not increased and no incentives have 
been introduced to improve productivity, efficiency and quality in the health sector.  
The comprehensive Law on tobacco control is still not enforced, because of a lack of political 
will and the poor performance of implementing authorities. 
On blood, tissues, cells and organs, a law on blood and blood components was adopted in 
August 2018 but, like the 2014 law on the transplantation of tissues and cells, it is only partly 
aligned with the acquis. Further alignment will depend on allocation of the necessary human 
and financial resources, and administrative and monitoring capacity.  
In the field of serious cross-border health threats, including communicable diseases, no 
progress was made in aligning with the acquis. Immunisation is lower than in previous years. 
Vaccination rates among school-age children are reported to vary between 95% and 98%. No 
updated antimicrobial resistance action plan was adopted, and control on the prescription of 
antibiotics to prevent antimicrobial resistance has not improved. The European Centre for 
Disease Prevention and Control conducted an expert assessment mission in Kosovo in 
October 2018 in the field of communicable diseases, which noted weak implementation of 
primary legislation and an absence of secondary legislation. 
Kosovo's legislation is not aligned with the EU’s acquis on patients’ rights in cross-border 
healthcare. The Ministry of Health has delayed the further development and rolling out 
across all health institutions of the electronic health information system (eHIS) based on the 
European core health indicators which would capture data on patient admissions, discharges 
and transfers. Further functionalities (pharmacy, pathology, radiology, blood transfusion, 
vaccination and other interventions) need to be added to the system and coverage needs to be 
expanded to support evidence-based health care policy. Kosovo citizens can benefit from 
special resources from the Health Insurance Fund for health services abroad, when specialist 
health services are unavailable in Kosovo. Kosovo has signed agreements with Albania, 
Croatia and Turkey on implementing certain medical services, which are now accessible for 
its citizens. However, the available funds (EUR 6 million) cover only 45 % of the needs of the 
population.  
No progress has been made in aligning Kosovo's legislation concerning medicines for 
human and veterinary use.  
Health promotion regarding non-communicable diseases remains weak. A strategy on 
health promotion and education was prepared in 2018 and is due to be adopted in 2019. With 
regard to cancer screening, a 2014-2020 cancer programme is in place. Registration of 
cancer-related deaths is incomplete due to gaps in the legal framework and deficiencies in the 
administrative procedures in the civil registration system. Funding for systematic cancer 
screening is inadequate and there is an overall lack of reliable data on cancerous diseases. 
There is no specific legislation on nutrition and physical activity. A nutrition action plan 
has been revised and is awaiting adoption by the government. 
No progress was made in addressing health inequalities. Kosovo does not provide universal 
health insurance and out-of-pocket spending for health services remains high. Around a third 
of the population still has no easy access to health care services or only limited access due a 
lack of funds. For economic reasons, around 18 % do not seek medical services in the event of 
illness. The Roma and Ashkali communities remain a concern as regard immunisation. The 


===== PAGE 72 =====
 
71 
 
distribution of information on public services and the incidence of discrimination have not 
improved and this has a negative impact on access to health services.   
6.13 
Education and culture 
Kosovo is at an early stage of preparation in the field of education and culture. There was 
limited progress in the past year and the quality of education needs to be improved 
considerably.  
As the previous report’s recommendations have not been addressed, in the coming year 
Kosovo should in particular: 
 adopt the new Law on higher education, which ensures the autonomy and independent 
operation of higher education institutions and quality assurance mechanisms, based on 
best standards;  
 improve access to quality education for pre-school enrolment and disadvantaged groups; 
 finalise the implementation of the new curricular framework for primary and secondary 
education; 
 increase the provision of vocational education and training for professions in demand. 
On education and training, public spending on education (4.7% of GDP) should be managed 
more efficiently to provide a large number of young people with quality education. 
Enrolment in primary and lower secondary education is almost universal (95.6%) and 
upper secondary overall enrolments stands at 85%. The number of children aged 0-5 attending 
licensed pre-school institutions remains very low (4.9%), some 19.1% attend preschool and 
pre-primary (0-6 years), while 92.4% attend the pre-primary year (5-6 years). Kosovo has 
continued to invest in public childcare facilities, but enrolment rates have not yet increased 
significantly. Many children attend private childcare, including preschool and private 
institutions, particularly in the capital. The enrolment rates are still far below the 2020 
education and training targets of 95%. Data provided so far by the institutions are not reliable, 
not easily accessible and do not account for a large number of private pre-school institutions. 
The proportion of students in higher education is nearly double the EU average. However, 
the graduation rate is low. Unemployment among university graduates is still relatively high, 
despite having declined to just above 20% in the last quarter of 2018, suggesting a mismatch 
between higher education programmes and labour market needs. The Accreditation Agency 
for Higher Education takes account of the 2015 European standards and guidelines and 
largely bases its internal policies on them.  
In January 2018, the Kosovo Assembly instructed the Ministry for Education to take all 
necessary measures to get the Agency readmitted to the European Quality Assurance Register 
for Higher Education, from which it had been excluded since September 2017 due to political 
interference. In June 2018, the Minister for Education appointed a new board for the Agency, 
following an open competition and approval by the Assembly. Progress on securing the 
Agency’s re-admittance to the European Quality Assurance Register for Higher Education is 
supposed to be addressed in the first half of 2019.  
Kosovo’s qualifications framework is based on the European Qualifications Framework. 
Education (especially higher education) remains a high-risk sector for corruption and political 
influence. Media and civil society organisations continually expose cases of plagiarism and 
academic promotions based on political influence and nepotism rather than merit, often 
involving professors in senior management positions. A lack of transparency in recruiting 
teachers and managing staff remains an issue across all educational institutions.  


===== PAGE 73 =====
 
72 
 
The government has approved the draft Law on higher education but it still needs to be 
adopted by the Assembly. The law on the Education Inspectorate was adopted in July 2018. 
There is not enough progress on meeting the 2017-2021 Kosovo Education Strategic Plan 
targets and the government allocated only half of the resources necessary for its 
implementation. A functional review identified problems in the Ministry of Education’s 
structure and capacities that prevent it from moving forward with the many reforms that are 
needed. The new organisational structure has been approved, but not yet implemented.  
The government needs to implement the quality assurance strategy and establish the quality 
assurance mechanisms at municipal level. The implementation of curriculum reform is 
undermined by a lack of qualified teaching staff, teaching materials and supplies, combined 
with an under-developed student assessment system. Kosovo needs to strengthen its training 
system to improve the quality of pre- and in-service education. The quality of education 
continues to be a challenge at all levels.  
Around half of all students in upper secondary education choose vocational education. 
Vocational education and training (VET) programmes lack practical and applied courses, with 
a still insufficient number accredited by the National Qualifications Authority. Overall, the 
link to the labour market remains weak. Kosovo should increase the quality of VET 
programmes and qualifications also by developing new profiles that match labour market 
needs and are taken on board by the private sector. 
More efforts are needed to provide children with disabilities with access to quality education. 
The first cohort of 54 assistants for children/students with special needs graduated in June 
2018. At present there are only 83 support teachers for children with disabilities; they are 
engaged and paid by families, rather than the education system.  
Measures should be taken to address the high dropout rate among Roma and Ashkali children, 
including by supporting and facilitating the work of the Learning Centres.  
Since January 2018, Kosovo has been able to participate in all activities of the Erasmus+ 
Programme and join platforms and networks. Almost 2 000 students and staff from Kosovo 
have been involved in the exchanges since 2015. Institutions from Kosovo participated in 20 
capacity-building projects in the field of higher education, in four of them as coordinating 
partners.  
Kosovo participated in the OECD PISA in 2018, with results due to be published in 
December 2019. Kosovo will also participate in the Trends in International Mathematics and 
Science 2019 and Progress in International Reading Literacy Study 2021 international 
assessments.  
On culture, Kosovo needs to continue its work to meet the standards of the 2005 UNESCO 
Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions and 
develop a track record showing good practice. In 2018, it joined Creative Europe as a partner 
in the culture sub-programme.  
On youth, the local antenna of the Regional Youth Cooperation Office (RYCO) continues its 
work and participated in or organised more than 30 events in 2018.  
Kosovo participated for the first time in the European Week of Sports by organising a large 
number of sports activities.    
6.14 
Science and research 
Kosovo is at an early stage of preparation for science and research. Limited progress was 
made in the field of innovation.  


===== PAGE 74 =====
 
73 
 
In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular: 
 ensure higher government spending on research and seek to stimulate investment from the 
private sector by completing a Smart Specialisation Strategy; 
 focus efforts on increasing participation in the EU’s Horizon 2020 programme; 
 provide statistical data on numbers of researchers, percentage of GDP spent on research 
and innovation, and performance related to the European Research Area priorities. 
Kosovo has made efforts to develop its research and innovation policy. However, the Law 
on scientific research activities is not being implemented due to lack of funding. Government 
spending on research amounts to only 0.1% of GDP. Kosovo has made some efforts to spend 
this limited amount more efficiently (e.g. building lecture rooms and laboratories, addressing 
plagiarism). In 2018, EUR 1.1 million was allocated for specific labs and equipment at two 
regional innovation centres. In higher education, the quality of post-graduate programmes 
preparing for research careers is poor, with both private and public higher education 
institutions applying very uneven criteria for promotion based on scientific research and 
publications. Since the last Research Strategy expired in 2016, Kosovo has not developed new 
strategic targets to support the development of research activity. The new Ministry of 
Innovation and Entrepreneurship should build up its administrative capacity and adopt an 
innovation strategy linked to the Smart Specialisation Strategy in close coordination with 
other ministries.  
There has been no progress on integration into the European Research Area. Kosovo needs 
to submit reliable statistics to monitor progress in this field. 
On framework programmes, Kosovo participates in the EU’s Horizon 2020 research and 
innovation programme (H2020) as a third party. It has so far participated in 11 Horizon 2020 
projects (10 in 2017 and a new one in 2018). The level of Horizon 2020 participation remains 
below Kosovo’s potential. Kosovo has already taken some initial actions to improve its 
Horizon 2020 performance and in particular, through more training, better linking of 
researchers, an improved National Contact Points network, exchanges of best practices and 
mentoring with other countries. Kosovo needs to continue and further strengthen these efforts.  
6.15 
Trade issues  
Kosovo is at an early stage of preparation in this area, with some progress over the past 
year concerning trade relations with the EU. However, its decision to impose 100% tariffs on 
goods imports originating in Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina is in violation of the Central 
European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) and hampers the development of a regional 
economic area (REA) in the Western Balkans. The EU has repeatedly called for the 
revocation of this measure, which is also economically counterproductive.  
In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular: 
 implement actions under the multi-annual action plan for the development of a REA. In 
particular ratify and implement CEFTA Additional Protocol  5 on trade facilitation, adopt 
and implement Additional Protocol 6 on trade in services and negotiate Additional 
Protocol 7 on dispute settlement; 
 strengthen the administrative capacity of the Ministry of Trade, in particular in view of  
regional commitments on trade.  


===== PAGE 75 =====
 
74 
 
Kosovo is at an early stage of preparation for applying for WTO observer status. A 
memorandum on the foreign trade regime has been prepared for adoption by the authorities. 
In July 2018, the new Law on trade safeguard measures on imports has been adopted, with the 
aim of aligning with WTO rules.  
Some progress was achieved as regards the free trade area with the EU, but Kosovo could 
improve opportunities for its exporters by making full use of trade preferences granted under 
the SAA. Kosovo abolished customs duties on a number of tariff lines, including industrial, 
agricultural and fishery products. Remaining duties will be reduced progressively in the 
period to 2025. While the overall volume of trade with the EU continued to increase, and the 
positive trend in the export of services was maintained in 2018, the overall trade deficit with 
the EU grew wider.  
Kosovo continued to implement a multi-annual action plan for the development of a REA in 
the Western Balkans, aimed at deepening and widening economic integration in the region, on 
the basis of EU rules and standards. In the first part of 2018, Kosovo authorities played an 
active and constructive role within CEFTA, which helped the parties to reach a technical 
agreement on the mutual recognition of authorised economic operators, and on the 
functioning of the CEFTA secretariat. In July, however, it introduced (and then revoked) 
unjustified protective measures on the imports of dairy products and fruit and vegetables. 
Moreover, in November, Kosovo imposed 100% import tariffs on goods originating from 
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, citing political and trade grievances. The measure goes 
against Kosovo’s obligations under CEFTA and undermines regional cooperation objectives, 
including the REA. 
Kosovo remains the only CEFTA party that has not ratified Additional Protocol 5 (trade 
facilitation). It has, together with the other CEFTA parties, to adopt Additional Protocol 6 
(trade in services). It also has to appoint a negotiator and adopt a mandate for the negotiation 
of Additional Protocol 7 (dispute settlement mechanism). The government has approved the 
initiative for signing the Joint Declaration on Cooperation with the European Free Trade 
Agreement (EFTA) countries.  
6.16 
Enterprise and industrial policy  
Kosovo is moderately prepared in this area. It made some progress on improving the 
business environment. It intensified efforts to review and simplify business-related legislation 
through the updated Better Regulation Strategy. There is a need to build up administrative 
capacity further and ensure stronger inter-ministerial coordination.  
The recommendations from the 2018 report were not fully implemented. In the coming year, 
Kosovo should in particular: 
 improve SMEs’ uptake of business support services by redesigning the schemes provided 
by the Kosovo Investment and Enterprise Support Agency (KIESA) and establish an 
investor aftercare unit;  
 continue implementing the recommendations in the EU Small Business Act (SBA) 
assessment; 
 ensure the alignment of the Law on economic zones with the acquis. 
On enterprise and industrial policy principles, the new private sector development strategy 
incorporating industrial policy has yet to be adopted. However, the draft strategy is limited to 
sectors under the responsibility of the Ministry of Trade and Industry, and suitable synergies 
need to be ensured with other relevant policies such as energy, education, and research and 


===== PAGE 76 =====
 
75 
 
development. Much stronger coordination is needed among the relevant ministries and 
agencies responsible for enterprise and industrial policy. The adoption of an innovation 
strategy is still pending. Kosovo’s Council for Innovation and Entrepreneurship has been 
charged with  coordinating the development a smart specialisation strategy.   
Kosovo has amended its Better Regulation Strategy, which provides for the replacement of 
the current system of ‘concept documents’ for drafting policy and legislative proposals by an 
impact assessment system, which would take greater account of the administrative burden on 
SMEs. Kosovo’s Economic Reform Programme includes a measure aimed at simplifying, 
merging and repealing licences and permits that business face. Tailored policies and targeted 
measures are needed to address the challenges experienced by female entrepreneurs. 
The Kosovo Credit Guarantee Fund has helped to increase demand for loans among SMEs. 
Scaling up the Fund and reforming the legislation to broaden the range of alternative financial 
instruments would further enhance external finance for SMEs. Introducing the planned 
factoring law will also help improve the transparency and legal enforceability of factoring 
services, which is instrumental for improving SMEs’ cash flow management.  
The law on economic zones, which regulates the establishment and financing of economic 
zones, is not aligned with the acquis. There are no specific programmes for restructuring, 
whether for sector-specific development or the general modernisation of industry. The Law on 
interest rights in trade transactions is in line with the EU Directive  on combating late 
payment in commercial transactions.  
The legal framework on insolvency proceedings has been strengthened. Proceedings 
involving an SME debtor are now treated as reorganization cases in which an appointed 
monitor is required to assist SMEs in their re-organisation plans. A legal framework and the 
necessary infrastructure to stimulate e-commerce are still lacking.  
On enterprise and industrial policy instruments, Kosovo has joined the COSME 
programme and is eligible for funding since September 2018. It has started to develop 
measures to raise awareness among business stakeholders. In 2019, it plans to apply to join 
the European Enterprise Network.  
6.17 
Agriculture  
Kosovo has some level of preparation on agriculture and rural development. Limited 
progress has been made on improving of the implementation of the agriculture and rural 
development programme. 
In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular: 
→ improve the evaluation and monitoring of grants and direct payments under the 
programme; 
→ revise and update the programme so that investments in the sector are more efficient; 
→ take urgent, effective measures to stop the loss of agricultural land and implement 
legislation on spatial planning. 
On horizontal issues, the budget allocated to the agricultural sector rose from EUR 46 
million in 2017 to EUR 48 million in 2018 for both direct payments and grants. The 
ascending trend continues in 2019. A special measures scheme has been set up with the 
purpose of supporting four municipalities in the north of Kosovo. In order to make the best 
use of assistance in the sector and achieve maximum impact, the strategy and programme for 
agriculture and rural development (for 2014-2020) requires thorough and transparent 
evaluation  and updating, taking into account the developments and the 2015 agriculture 


===== PAGE 77 =====
 
76 
 
census. The Ministry of Agriculture adopted the direct payments programme and rural 
development programme for 2018. No changes were made to the mechanism and 
requirements for direct payments, which remain coupled to production. Cross-compliance 
measures still need to be introduced. While internal auditing has been strengthened, a lack of 
professional capacity for evaluation, monitoring and accounting at the Agency for 
Agricultural Development continues to slow down the proper processing of applications and 
the execution of payments. Kosovo has made some progress on establishing an Integrated 
Administration and Control System (IACS), as it is currently upgrading its Land Parcel 
Identification System (LPIS). It has established an electronic farmer register, an animal 
identification and registration system and a Farm Accountancy Data Network (FADN). Farm 
advisory services are provided, but they need to be strengthened. 
No progress has been made in establishing common market organisations. Kosovo should 
take steps to draw up the legal basis for setting it up and provide for its functioning. 
No relevant changes were made in the area of rural development, where measures continue 
to address the modernisation of farms and food processing facilities. The level of funding 
remains low and the efficiency of current rural development measures weak, in particular as 
regards concerning investments in farms, primary food processing, job creation in rural areas, 
building up and empowering local communities, land consolidation, access to irrigation and 
farmer education updates. 
On geographical indications, progress was made by adopting legislation which allows 
products originating from Kosovo which are marked according to the designation of origin, to 
be labelled with the indication “protected geographical indication” and “protected designation 
of origin” or with the symbols that accompany them. 
On quality policy, there is little progress. Legislation still has to be aligned with the acquis 
and properly implemented.  
On organic farming, Kosovo adopted a 2018-2021 action plan for organic agriculture, which 
identifies key areas of work with a view to supporting and developing the organic sector.  
No progress was made as regards the availability of arable land. The changes to the legislation 
on agricultural land use continue to limit its availability and farms’ productivity. There is no 
official information on how much agricultural land Kosovo loses each year and no strategy or 
action plan to address this issue. In cooperation with the Ministry of Environment and Spatial 
Planning, the Ministry of Agriculture should take urgent measures to stop further losses of 
agricultural land and to implement legislation governing spatial planning. 
6.18 
Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy 
Kosovo has some level of preparation in the area of food safety, veterinary and 
phytosanitary policy. Some progress was made in adopting legislation on food safety and 
veterinary.  
In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular: 
→ implement an integrated food control system, including by transferring inspection 
responsibilities to the Food and Veterinary Agency; 
→ complete and launch the animal by-products collection and disposal system; 
→ establish quality infrastructure for food safety with a focus on obtaining international 
accreditation for tests and laboratories. 
Progress has been made in completing the legislation governing food and feed safety. The 


===== PAGE 78 =====
 
77 
 
registration and categorisation of food and feed establishments has been completed. The Food 
and Veterinary Agency continues to perform regular checks on import and export of live 
animals, animal products, plants and plant products, but EU registered establishments do not 
require import licenses. A drug and residue monitoring plan is being prepared. The Agency 
has prepared a multi-annual control plan for food and feed safety and capacities for its 
implementation have increased.    
Efforts need to continue in preparing the transfer of inspection responsibilities from 
municipalities to the Agency.  
On veterinary policy, some progress has been made in completing legislation. The Food and 
Veterinary Agency is currently upgrading its system for border inspection. The trade control 
and expert system is used for exports only. Infrastructure at the veterinary border inspection 
posts remains poor. None of the posts has quarantine facilities for live animals.  
There were no relevant developments in the area of animal health. A multi-annual animal 
disease control and surveillance programme is in place, but full implementation is not 
ensured, as the Agency has insufficient funds and capacity. As part of regional efforts to 
control and eradicate rabies, the Agency resumed vaccination campaigns with EU support. 
The vaccination programme for lumpy skin disease is ongoing. The Agency still has 
insufficient capacity for responding to disease outbreaks.  
As regards the management of animal by-products, progress is being made on building and 
equipping the category I rendering plant and the inspectors and slaughterhouse operators have 
been trained on compliance with relevant regulation. However, further efforts are needed to 
ensure that there is a proper collection system for animal by-products.  
No progress was made in the area of animal identification and registration, where the 
under-reporting of animal movements remains a problem. The Agency has still not adopted 
measures to enforce the regulation on animal identification and registration at the level of 
livestock markets, slaughterhouses and livestock transport. 
Although the identification of basic cross-compliance measures in the areas of food safety 
and animal health and welfare remains a priority for the Agency, progress needs to be done on 
including them in the agriculture programme. 
With regards to phytosanitary measures, preparatory work is ongoing to support better 
inspections, sampling and detection of plant diseases. Although some training is being carried 
out on monitoring plant health and the management of plant protection products, further 
efforts are needed to improve the implementation and the operational capacity of the 
institutions responsible for plant health, in order to ensure an effective plant disease control 
system. 
6.19 
Fisheries 
Kosovo is still at an early stage of preparation in the area of fisheries. No progress was 
achieved since the last year’s report.  
Since none of the last report’s recommendations were implemented, in the coming year, 
Kosovo should:  
 further align its market policy with the acquis; 
 establish an inventory of fish species. 
As the fisheries sector consists of commercial lake fishing and aquaculture, the acquis on 
catch quotas, inspection and control is of very limited applicability. Kosovo should focus on 


===== PAGE 79 =====
 
78 
 
drafting a market policy in line with the acquis, establishing an inventory of fish species and 
carrying out inspections as required under the acquis.  
6.20 
Environment and climate change  
Kosovo is at an early stage of preparation on environment and climate change. Some 
progress was achieved, notably through the adoption of the relevant strategies, but serious 
environmental problems continue to impact people's livelihoods and health. The growing 
environmental protection and climate change challenges call for considerably more political 
will.  
In the coming year, Kosovo should: 
 establish an effective water monitoring system, publish the data and undertake urgent and 
permanent measures to reduce air and water pollution; 
 continue to increase the household waste collection coverage and address the issue of 
illegal dumpsites; 
 enforce legal provisions on environmental liability, damage and crime; implement the 
polluter pays principle and raise public awareness on environmental protection; 
 implement the climate change strategy and the action plan on climate change, prepare a 
roadmap for alignment with the climate acquis and start the work on an energy and 
climate plan, in line with Energy Community recommendations. 
Environment 
The environment strategy has still not been updated and implemented. Insufficient funding 
and a lack of administrative capacity and technical skills continue to undermine the 
implementation of priority measures. Further progress is needed for full alignment and 
implementation of the remaining directives. The lack of alignment with the environmental 
liability Directive undermines the effectiveness of environmental protection. Progress was 
made on strengthening provisions on environmental crime in the newly adopted criminal 
code, but prosecutors and courts are ineffective and lack training in this area. Environmental 
inspectorates lack capacity and are unable to ensure effective enforcement. The 
implementation of the environmental impact assessment and strategic impact assessments 
Directives needs to be improved considerably, especially in the sectors with significant 
impacts on the environment such as energy and transport. Meaningful involvement and 
consultation of the public and civil society is necessary.  
Air quality continues to pose a major threat to human health and efforts should be made in 
adopting measures to improve it, notably by enforcing the emission reduction plan, which was 
adopted in 2018. Kosovo's strategy for air quality is not enforced. An action plan for air 
quality and a law on air protection from pollution have to be adopted. Uncontrolled pollution 
from the energy sector (particularly from the Kosovo B power plant and household heating), 
but also from industrial complexes, road traffic and the incineration of waste and other toxic 
materials remains a serious problem and has not been addressed. Air quality plans for zones in 
which pollutants levels visibly exceed limit values by a wide margin, especially in winter, 
have still not been prepared and adopted. An air quality monitoring system, with eight 
measuring stations providing real-time data to the public, is now operational. Urgent measures 
and permanent solutions are needed to reduce household reliance on lignite and wood heating.  
The solid waste management system in Kosovo continues to be unsustainable. The legal 
framework is partially aligned with the acquis but implementation is lacking and most of the 
waste ends up in legal and illegal landfills. Collection needs to increase further while 


===== PAGE 80 =====
 
79 
 
recycling of the different waste streams to be introduced. The 2013-2022 strategy and master 
plan for waste management are only partly reflected in municipal plans for solid waste. The 
responsible authorities should move towards a circular economy approach, based on waste 
reduction, separation at source, recycling and recovery. Efforts are being made to address the 
high number of illegal dumpsites, but more urgent and sustainable measures (including 
prevention and monitoring) are needed. Most existing landfills have reached the end of their 
storage capacity and pose considerable long-term environmental risks, especially groundwater 
contamination. This is particularly the case of the Mirash landfill in Obiliq/Obilić which 
requires urgent rehabilitation and permanent closure. 
Some progress has been noted on water, notably through the adoption of the Kosovo 2017-
2036 national water strategy including an investment action plan. However, there is no 
progress in aligning water legislation with the acquis. Urgent efforts are required to ensure 
that the river basin authority, which was established in July 2017, is operational and prepares 
the management plans. There was some progress on international cooperation on integrated 
water management. Untreated sewage and discharge remain the main source of pollution. A 
monitoring network is operational for groundwater but not for surface waters. No drinking 
water quality reports have been published since 2015. Agglomerations and sensitive areas 
need to be identified, in line with the Urban Waste Water Treatment Directive. Budget 
funding needs to be secured for priority projects in this area. Tariff collection needs to be 
improved and technical water losses reduced.  
Some progress on nature protection was noted, notably by the adoption of the 2016-2020 
action plan on biodiversity. Steps have been taken to start the inventory and mapping of 
natural habitats types and of biodiversity, but the designation of Natura 2000 sites is still at a 
very early stage, due to a lack of technical and staff capacities in relevant institutions.  
Spatial planning documents and infrastructure plans need to ensure that nature protection 
obligations are respected, particularly in already protected areas such as national and regional 
parks, and potential Natura 2000 sites.  
No developments were noted on alignment with the acquis on industrial pollution and risk 
management, which remains at an early stage. Insufficient enforcement of legislation and 
polluter accountability is hampering progress in setting up a system for preventing industrial 
and chemical accidents. Hazardous mine waste, industrial discharge directly into rivers and 
industrial dumpsites continue to pose serious threats to soil and water. The location for the 
future hazardous waste storage facility still need to be determined and an operator contracted. 
No progress has been registered on chemicals, where alignment with the acquis remains at an 
early stage. Kosovo is not party to the Rotterdam Convention and the regulatory framework 
on export and import of hazardous chemicals still needs to be implemented. A helpdesk and a 
centre for the control of chemical poisoning still need to be established.  
The draft law on noise has yet to be adopted. Strategic noise maps and action plans still need 
to be developed and effective action taken to implement the law (once adopted). 
Kosovo is not part of the Union civil protection mechanism but has been a beneficiary of the 
regional programmes on civil protection under the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance 
(IPA) since 2010. Significant progress is still necessary in important areas such as 
establishing an operational centre and emergency communication system. The preliminary 
flood risk assessment is at an early stage of preparation.   
Climate change 


===== PAGE 81 =====
 
80 
 
The 2019-2028 strategy and action plan on climate change has been approved by the 
government and if fully implemented, it can provide a sound basis for tackling climate 
change.  However, no progress has been achieved in aligning the legislation. The National 
Council for the Environment and Climate Change and the Climate Change Coordinator took 
no concrete measures to mainstream climate action or raise public awareness. There is little 
evidence of climate change being mainstreamed in government projects.  
Although Kosovo is not a signatory to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 
and therefore does not have nationally determined contribution (NDC) to the 2015 Paris 
Agreement, full implementation of its climate change strategy should help it reach the low 
emissions and climate-resilient objectives of the agreement.  
As regards the transparency of climate action, the compiling of greenhouse gas inventory and 
reporting stopped after 2015. Kosovo still has to align with the climate acquis. Administrative 
capacity and awareness-raising activities need to be strengthened considerably. 
6.21 
Transport policy 
Kosovo is at an early stage/has some level of preparation in the area of transport policy. 
Some progress was achieved, in particular with the ratification of the Transport Community 
Treaty. 
In the coming year Kosovo should in particular:  
 urgently improve road safety by targeting the reduction of road fatalities and serious road 
traffic injuries and set up a system for continuous road crash data collection; 
 strengthen the capacity and professionalism of the railway regulator and ensure sufficient 
funding; 
 adopt legislation on the intelligent transport system (ITS) and develop a strategic 
framework for the implementation of the ITS on core networks, ensuring sufficient 
capacity and resources for its implementation.  
As regards transport in general, progress was made with the ratification of the Transport 
Community Treaty in October 2018. The legal framework is not aligned with the acquis on 
summertime arrangements. Further efforts should be made to complete alignment with the 
acquis on public services obligations, including on procedures and criteria for the award of 
public service contracts in road transport. Further efforts are required to implement the 
connectivity reform measures, with a special focus on measures related to border crossings, 
road safety and (road and rail) maintenance plans. The rail sector should be further developed 
and its services improved. Efforts are needed to align with the intelligent transport system 
Directive and rail interoperability Directive. Efforts should be maintained to align EU 
passenger rights legislation in all transport modes.  
There were no significant developments as regards reducing fatalities and serious traffic 
injuries in road transport. The technical inspection of vehicles continues to be deficient and 
improvements are needed on roadside checks and the legal competence and capacity of 
inspection officers. Better driver information, education and training are also necessary. 
Alignment with the acquis on social legislation and road safety, which is crucial to reduce 
fatalities, remains incomplete. Further efforts are needed to establish a Kosovo-wide system 
for continuous road-crash data collection. There has been no progress on aligning the legal 
framework on dangerous goods with the acquis or further aligning the legislation on access to 
the market for goods and passenger transport. The criteria for access to the occupation of road 
transport operator also requires further alignment. There has been no progress on aligning the 


===== PAGE 82 =====
 
81 
 
legislation on clean and energy-efficient road transport vehicles or on the deployment of an 
alternative fuels infrastructure. Legislation or regulatory framework for the implementation of 
ITS needs to be put in place. Kosovo has yet to adopt and implement rules on penalties for 
infringing the European Agreement concerning the Work of Crews of Vehicles engaged in 
International Road Transport. 
As regards rail transport, some progress was made in aligning legislation with the acquis. 
The rehabilitation of rail route 10 is delayed and will require an increase in the capacity of the 
railway infrastructure company.  
On aviation, Kosovo has made progress in aligning with the acquis and has met nearly all the 
requirements under the first transitional phase of the European Common Aviation Area 
Agreement (ECAA). Action is now needed to implement the few remaining provisions in the 
area of economic regulation, in particular relating labour law. The lack of revenue from upper 
air space management constraints Kosovo's ability to invest in training and infrastructure 
development.  
The Commission has engaged with Kosovo using the appropriate instruments to enhance 
understanding of the acquis in the field of aviation security and ensure gradual alignment. 
No developments were noted on combined transport. Implementation of the multimodal 
transport strategy should be prioritised. 
6.22 
Energy 
Kosovo has some level of preparation  in the field of energy. There was some progress in 
this area, including adoption of the 2018-2020 strategy implementation programme and 
further implementation of the third energy package, especially alignment with acquis on 
energy efficiency.  
In the coming year, Kosovo should: 
 prepare for the decommissioning of the Kosovo A power plant and the environmental 
upgrade of Kosovo B;  
 make the Energy Efficiency Fund fully operational and increase energy efficiency 
incentives for the private sector and households; 
 focus on renewable energy, including by introducing market-based support schemes and 
addressing investments barriers;  
 adopt a plan that includes the gradual adjustment of energy tariffs reflecting expected 
increases in costs and mitigation measures for vulnerable consumers. 
Kosovo approved an implementation programme for 2018-2020 to operationalise policy 
orientations set out in the 2017-2026 energy strategy. The programme is meant to address 
some energy and environmental problems in the medium term. Kosovo continues to rely 
nearly exclusively on lignite as a source of energy and on two obsolete, highly polluting 
coal-fired power plants. This adds significantly to its heavy air pollution problems. 
No significant developments were noted on security of supply, although the reliability of the 
power transmission system continues to benefit from investment and maintenance. No 
progress was made on the operation of the new transmission line to Albania which remains 
non-functional due to the longstanding energy dispute with Serbia and the lack of a 
connection agreement between the European Network of Transmission System Operators for 
Electricity and the Kosovo transmissions system operator. The lack of a political solution to 
the dispute also led to power deviations originating in Kosovo and Serbia, which in turn 


===== PAGE 83 =====
 
82 
 
resulted in frequency deviations in the entire synchronous area of continent Europe in winter 
2017/2018.  
Distribution losses remain high and investment in and maintenance of the distribution 
network needs to be improved. There was no progress on aligning legislation with the acquis 
in the area of compulsory oil and petroleum reserves. Current estimated oil stocks are 
sufficient for only four days.  
Apart from adopting an administrative instruction on security of natural gas supply, Kosovo 
made little progress on improving its record of compliance with the gas acquis. The pre-
feasibility study on linking a possible gas pipeline between Kosovo and Albania to the trans 
Adriatic pipeline (TAP) project was completed in November 2018. The project depends on 
the construction of the Ionian-Adriatic pipeline and the gas transmission system to Fushë 
Kruje in Albania.  
As regards the internal energy market, there was progress in the implementation of the third 
energy package and the certification of the transmission system operator has been completed. 
However, the lack of regional integration and the longstanding dispute between the 
transmission system operators in Kosovo and Serbia is limiting the scope for developing 
competition.  
As regards the new Kosova e Re coal-based power plant project, selection of a contractor for 
works is underway. Following the World Bank’s withdrawal from the partial loan guarantee, 
financing arrangements for the estimated EUR 1 billion plus project are still to be settled. It 
may have a major impact on public finances, tariffs and the environment and this must be 
carefully assessed. The contractual framework for the construction of the new plant, which 
involves designating a single buyer of the electricity it produces, could negatively impact the 
opening of the market. 
Environmental measures are urgently required at Kosovo B to reduce the level of gaseous 
emissions in the air and comply with emissions limit. The Kosovo Energy Corporation (KEK) 
needs to establish the timing of all works in view of the planned EU assistance for the 
refurbishment of Kosovo B to bring it into line with the provisions of the large combustion 
plants Directive on dust and NOx emissions. Preparations also need to be made for the 
decommissioning of non-operating units at Kosovo A, including identifying land for the 
disposal of hazardous waste. The current legal framework is not in line with the large 
combustion plants and industrial emissions Directives. Kosovo adopted an emission reduction 
plan in 2018.  
Kosovo has made some progress in phasing out cross-subsidies between different categories 
of customers, but tariffs for households do not yet reflect costs. In view of expected upward 
price pressure from the significant investments required in the electricity sector, Kosovo 
needs to develop a programme for protecting vulnerable customers in line with Energy 
Community requirements. The electricity consumption in the north of Kosovo, which was 
considered as a loss in the past and recovered through the retail tariff for customers who pay 
for electricity, is now treated as a loss of the transmission system operator. The capacity and 
independence of the Energy Regulatory Office have been undermined by political 
interference. As a matter of priority, the Office should improve its monitoring of market 
functioning and competition. Its financial stability should be ensured in accordance with 
applicable legislation and the third energy package. 
There was some progress on renewable energy sources. A new 32 MW wind farm and 2 
solar projects with a capacity of 6 MW have been put into operation. The revision figures of 
biomass used for heating by household customers puts Kosovo on track to achieving its 25% 


===== PAGE 84 =====
 
83 
 
target in 2020. While the legislation is partially aligned with the acquis, the electricity market 
should be restructured so as to facilitate the integration of renewable energy generation. A 
market-based scheme for supporting independent producers should be introduced.  
There was no progress in meeting the requirements for the use of biofuels in transport. The 
adoption of an administrative instruction on biofuels aimed at aligning with the relevant EU 
Directives, has been pending for over three years. 
There was good progress on alignment with the energy efficiency acquis, with the adoption 
of the new Law on energy efficiency, which is partly aligned with the EU energy efficiency 
Directive. The secondary legislation on the energy performance of buildings has to be 
completed and services need to be developed for energy auditing and energy assessors. The 
Energy Efficiency Fund has been established and its board has been appointed. Kosovo 
should ensure sure that the Fund becomes operational. 25 Municipalities have developed 
energy efficiency action plans. Investments in energy efficiency in public buildings have been 
made but incentives for the private sector and households are lagging behind. Kosovo 
achieved only about half of the 9% energy efficiency target by 2018. The Kosovo Agency for 
Energy Efficiency is understaffed and has very limited capacity to monitor the 
implementation of energy efficiency policy. Kosovo needs to bring into operation the 
monitoring and verification platform for energy savings. 
Some progress has been made on nuclear safety and radiation protection, notably by the 
adoption of the new Law on radiation protection and nuclear safety. However further efforts 
are needed to fully align the legal and regulatory framework. The licensing and inspection 
capacity of the Nuclear Safety and Radiation Protection Agency remains weak and its funding 
is insufficient for it to implement its mandate. No developments were noted on the monitoring 
of radiation (e.g. from depleted uranium) and there is no control of radioactive waste and no 
radiological emergency plan. Kosovo has still not found a solution for the temporary storage 
of radioactive waste. As regards international cooperation in this area, it signed memoranda of 
understanding with the United States, Albania and North Macedonia. It is not party to the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety or the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel 
Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management.  
6.23 
Trans-European networks  
In the area of trans-European networks (TENs), Kosovo has some level of preparation and 
some progress was achieved, notably with the ratification of the Transport Community 
Treaty. More needs to be done on energy and telecommunications networks.  
In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular: 
 proceed with harmonising the legal framework with the acquis (TEN-T and TEN-E) and 
implementation of the connectivity reform measures;  
 strengthen the institutional framework and administrative capacities for the 
implementation of TEN, including the Transport Community Treaty; 
 improve the capacity of the Regulatory Authority of Electronic and Postal 
Communications to enforce telecommunications market regulations. 
On transport networks, the strategic framework for the development of the trans-European 
transport network (TEN-T) is covered by the 2015-2025 sectoral and multimodal transport 
strategy, which includes a 5-year action plan. The Kosovo Assembly ratified the Transport 
Community Treaty in October 2018.  
As in the previous period, institutional capacity to implement strategic projects needs to be 


===== PAGE 85 =====
 
84 
 
strengthened at central and local government levels, for public procurement, investment 
project planning, preparation and management. Priority projects in core and comprehensive 
networks still need to be completed. Future infrastructure investments need to be implemented 
in compliance with EU standards on public procurement, state aid and environmental impact 
assessment. Projects should be channelled through a single project pipeline, confirming the 
strategic orientation towards the TENs. The implementation of the railway route 10 project 
the route 6-highway project is slower than expected. The authorities should take immediate 
measures to finalise the remaining rail border crossing protocols with North Macedonia. Also, 
additional efforts are required to ensure opening of the rail market on the indicative extension 
of the Orient/East-Med corridor. While it has made some progress on the adoption of 
maintenance plans for the entire (road and rail) core network, Kosovo is still lagging behind 
in this respect and further efforts are needed.  
On energy networks, there is no progress on the new 400kV transmission line and load 
frequency control with Albania, which are not operational because the connection agreement 
between the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity and the 
Kosovo transmissions system operator is not being implemented. A pre-feasibility study on a 
gas pipeline between Kosovo and Albania (Alkogap) deriving from the TAP project, was 
completed in November 2018. The investment cost is estimated at EUR 211 million, 
including EUR 61 million in Kosovo, but the project depends on the construction of the 
Ionian-Adriatic pipeline and the gas transmission system to Fushë Kruje in Albania.  
On telecommunication networks, no progress has been made on strengthening of the 
institutional capacity of the Regulatory Authority of Electronic and Postal Communications to 
design and enforce regulations.  
6.24 
Information society and media 
Kosovo has some level of preparation in this area. The legislative framework is mostly in 
place but there was no progress on implementation. A sustainable solution for the funding of 
the public broadcaster remains to be adopted. As in previous years, the Independent Media 
Commission did not move forward with the process of switching from analogue to digital 
television.  
A majority of last report’s recommendations have not been followed up. In the coming year 
Kosovo should in particular: 
 ensure that telecoms and media regulators are given adequate resources to fulfil their 
mandates  independently and develop a solution for the sustainable funding of the public 
service broadcaster; 
 free the first digital dividend / liberate frequencies; 
 revise the Law on the Independent Media Commission so as to increase the availability of 
data on the audio-visual sector and extend the regulator’s regulatory, monitoring and 
enforcement powers. 
On electronic communications and information and communication technologies (ICT), 
there has been no improvement in the financial and organisational independence of the 
Regulatory Authority of Electronic and Postal Communications. The Kosovo Agency of 
Statistics published data on the use of ICT. According to the survey, 93.2% of households had 
access to the internet, a 4.4 pps increase from the previous year. Some 90.2% accessed the 
internet through fixed connections, a 6.6 pps increase from the previous year, whereas the 
number accessing the internet through mobile connections remained the same, at 24.6 %.  


===== PAGE 86 =====
 
85 
 
The mid-term targets of the 2013-2020 Digital Agenda for Kosovo have been fully achieved 
and the strategy is being implemented. The telecom regulator postponed implementation of 
the +383 dialling code to January 2019 at the request of operators but the transition was only 
partially implemented by the deadline. The regulator is fining each operator EUR 10,000 for 
each month of delay following the January deadline. The regulator has reviewed pricing 
policies for frequency allocation and this has resulted in a 30 % price drop for the currently 
allocated frequencies for mobile telephony services. The regulator is also currently reviewing 
pricing policies for new frequency allocations and annual regulatory fees. Authorities took 
part in the preparations of the Regional Roaming Agreement and signed the agreement in 
April 2019.    
As regards the information society, several legal initiatives are ongoing. Kosovo is currently 
working on alignment with the Electronic Identification, Authentication and Trust Services 
Regulation, the Directive on the Security of Network and Information Systems and the 
Broadband Cost Reduction Directive. The computer security incident response team, set up in 
2014, is still understaffed. Modernisation of the public administration is a key element for 
successful digitalisation. Kosovo should put more effort in implementation of e-government 
frameworks and services. 
On audio-visual policy, the Independent Media Commission again failed to make any 
substantial progress in implementing the digital switchover, even though the International 
Telecommunications Union deadline expired in June 2015. No funds have been allocated or 
identified to implement the process. The Law on the Independent Media Commission 
provides it with sufficient regulatory, monitoring and enforcement powers to foster the 
pluralism and competitiveness of the market but it has not carried out any market analysis for 
years and does not sanction broadcasters efficiently for failure to comply with the law. This is 
partly due to a lack of data on the distribution of the advertising funds, the audience and the 
ownership structure of the TV and radio channels and the media outlets. The creation of the 
Media Registry could provide the regulator with the requisite data to carry out proper market 
analysis. The revision of the Law on the Independent Media Commission should extend its 
regulatory powers to audio-visual media services available online (e.g. video on demand, 
catch-up TV and webTV), which are covered by the audio-visual media services Directive. In 
addition, the Independent Media Commission needs adequate staffing and funding to operate 
independently. Kosovo needs to speed up its efforts and ensure that the digital switchover is 
carried out in full transparency and in line with EU standards. The public service broadcaster, 
Radio Television of Kosovo (RTK), remains directly state-funded, with its budget determined 
annually by the Assembly. This undermines its editorial independence, weakens its long-term 
sustainability and leaves it prone to political influence. The Assembly has drafted a new Law 
on the public broadcaster, including a potential solution for sustainable funding for RTK. 
6.25 
Financial control 
Kosovo has some level of preparation in the area of financial control. Good progress was 
made with the adoption of the public internal financial control (PIFC) law and some of its 
secondary legislation, further piloting of the internal control quality reviews by the Central 
Harmonisation Unit, the adoption of the 2018-2021 strategic development plan of the 
National Audit Office, and increased performance audit work. However, further efforts are 
needed to implement managerial accountability, including the delegation of decision-making 
authority, and to strengthen functioning of internal control and audit. High level political 
support will remain instrumental for implementation of PIFC at all levels of administration. 
The timely implementation of internal and external audit recommendations should be 
improved.  


===== PAGE 87 =====
 
86 
 
In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular:  
 adopt a new medium-term strategy document on PIFC, with a specific focus on the 
definition and implementation of managerial accountability; 
 adopt the outstanding secondary legislation under the new PIFC law; 
 ensure more systematic and timely implementation of external audit recommendations. 
Public internal financial control 
The strategic framework for PIFC is partially in place; its policy paper will expire at the end 
of 2019. From 2020 onwards, Kosovo needs to develop a comprehensive PIFC policy 
document, focusing on the definition and implementation of managerial accountability. PIFC, 
public administration reform and public financial management reform strategic framework 
need to be aligned, and a mechanism needs to be set up for the effective coordination, 
monitoring and reporting of the reforms. 
Kosovo needs to make further efforts to embed managerial accountability in the 
administrative culture. There is currently little delegation of decision-making to middle 
management within institutions. Managerial accountability is further limited by a primary 
focus on compliance rather than on performance. The government has started to implement 
the action plan for the rationalisation of agencies, which was adopted in June 2018. This is 
expected to improve accountability between institutions by reducing the high number of 
(semi-)independent agencies and introducing better supervision and reporting lines (See 
section on Public Administration Reform). 
The new PIFC Law, adopted in April 2018, provides a good basis for internal control 
implementation, and is in line with international standards. Some pieces of secondary 
legislation still needs to be adopted. The application of risk management is still at an early 
stage, and irregularity management and reporting should also be developed further. The new 
law on whistle-blower adopted in November 2018 contributes to the internal control 
framework. 
Internal audit practice needs to be improved. Staffing capacity is insufficient, as around 
40% of internal audit units have only one auditor. Nevertheless, most internal audit units 
comply with the requirement to submit strategic and annual audit plans. Internal audit focuses 
mostly on compliance with existing rules and procedures. Internal audit recommendations are 
not systematically implemented. 
The Central Harmonisation Unit in the Ministry of Finance is responsible for developing 
and disseminating methodological guidance on internal control and internal audit 
implementation in the public sector. It has undertaken quality reviews on both internal control 
and internal audit in the past year. It prepares an annual report on the implementation of PIFC 
based on replies to self-assessment questionnaires and its own quality reviews. The annual 
report contains recommendations, which should be more systematically implemented. 
External audit 
Kosovo’s constitutional and legal framework provides for the functional, organisational and 
financial independence of the National Audit Office in line with the standards of the 
International Organisation of Supreme Audit Institutions. 
The institutional capacity has increased further to 164 staff, of whom 137 are audit staff. The 
Office is implementing its new 2018-2021 strategic development plan, which includes 
objectives, performance indicators and a monitoring framework. 


===== PAGE 88 =====
 
87 
 
The Office has introduced quality control and assurance procedures to improve the quality of 
audit work and continues to implement a certification programme for auditors. It finalised 13 
performance audit reports, compared to 11 reports in 2017 and 5 reports in 2016. 
The National Audit Office has recognised the need to improve the impact of audit work, as 
audited institutions, especially at local level, do not implement audit recommendations 
sufficiently or in a timely manner. According to the 2018 annual report, in 2017 only 34% of 
external audit recommendations issued in 2016 were implemented in full, 26% in part, and 
40% not at all. The Assembly has not yet established an efficient mechanism for the follow-
up of audit reports. The National Audit Office continues to strengthen its overall 
communication policy and engages more actively with civil society. 
Protection of the EU’s financial interests 
Alignment with the acquis in this area still needs to be assessed. No anti-fraud 
coordination service has been established, and no anti-fraud strategy has been adopted. 
Cooperation is governed by an administrative agreement between the Kosovo Police and the 
European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF). It is designed to ensure the timely transmission of 
information and cooperation in cases relating to alleged fraud and other illegal activities 
affecting the financial interests of the EU.  
Protection of the euro against counterfeiting 
Kosovo has established competent authorities and procedures for dealing with counterfeit 
money, but alignment with the acquis in this area still needs to be assessed. The Law on the 
Central Bank prohibits the circulation of counterfeit money. The Central Bank has issued a 
regulation on cash operations to strengthen rules and procedures for financial institutions 
operating in Kosovo. Kosovo takes part in the actions of the Pericles 2020 programme. 
6.26 
Statistics 
Kosovo has some level of preparation in the area of statistics. Good progress was made in 
addressing some of last year's recommendations, in particular by amending the Law on 
statistics, improving national accounts and expanding social statistics, notably through the 
first full-scale survey following the methodology of the EU statistics on income and living 
conditions (EU-SILC). The Kosovo Agency of Statistics (KAS) has adopted the 
recommendations of the Eurostat peer review and developed an action plan for their 
implementation. However, it continues to suffer from insufficient resources and capacities. 
Coordination between statistical institutions has not improved much. Significant efforts are 
still needed especially to ensure the alignment of macro-economic, business, and 
environmental statistics with European standards.  
In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular: 
 implement the recommendations of the Eurostat peer review according to the adopted 
action plan;  
 improve statistical governance and coordination between the main statistical institutions; 
ensure better access to and use of available administrative data sources;   
 continue to make necessary preparations for the next (2021) population census, ensuring 
full coverage of the territory.  
On statistical infrastructure, the legal framework is broadly in line with the European 
statistics code of practice. Amendments to the Law on statistics were adopted in 
December 2018. While these strengthen the role of KAS within the statistical system, they did 
not fully address Eurostat’s concerns regarding the duration of the mandate of the head of the 


===== PAGE 89 =====
 
88 
 
Agency. Despite the government approval of 10 new positions, which are in the process of 
being filled, KAS still has inadequate human and financial resources to carry out surveys and 
data analysis independently: this hinders the timely production of statistics. In order to 
produce more and better statistics, KAS should also improve its efficiency and develop a 
quality management system and new data collection methods. KAS should continue to 
improve its communication with different administrative data sources,  so that it can reinforce 
its coordination role within Kosovo’s statistical system, provide timely and reliable statistics, 
and increase the number of statistics it publishes. Its current premises remain inadequate. Data 
transmission to and data disseminated by Eurostat improved further. In the last year, the 
number of data points from Kosovo available in Eurobase increased by 30 %. KAS is using its 
web-based dissemination of statistics, but updates are not as timely and complete as the pdf 
publications, which reduces the usefulness of the web-based platform. The European 
classification of economic activities (NACE Rev.2) continues to be applied in all relevant 
statistical areas. Work is ongoing to align the statistical business register more closely with 
the reality of economic activities in Kosovo. The electronic data transmission procedure was 
developed with the Kosovo Business Registration Agency (KBRA) and the Kosovo Tax 
Administration (TAK), and the Statistical Business Register is automatically updated with 
data collected in various surveys. The population register needs significant improvement in 
order to provide comprehensive and reliable information ahead of the planned 2021 census. In 
general, KAS should put more effort into aligning existing data with Eurostat requirements, in 
order to increase their visibility. 
On macroeconomic statistics, further alignment with the European System of National and 
Regional Accounts (ESA 2010) is ongoing. KAS publishes quarterly national accounts at 
T+90 days, but annual and quarter sector accounts, supply/use tables and regional accounts 
are not compiled regularly. Fiscal notifications and financial accounts are not yet available. 
Monthly statistics for trade in goods and annual figures for trade in services are submitted to 
Eurostat. The Central Bank of Kosovo compiles balance of payments data broadly in line with 
the acquis and submits annual and quarterly to Eurostat. Government finance statistics are 
published quarterly. Kosovo publishes a harmonised index of consumer prices based on EU 
standards (ECOICOP classification), but Eurostat does not currently publish it due to 
problems of consistency in aggregation. 
Structural business statistics and some short-term statistics are partly in line with the acquis, 
but the availability of short-term statistics remains limited. Industry statistics are compiled on 
a quarterly basis, but no statistics are compiled on the construction and service sectors. The 
construction cost index is produced on a quarterly basis. Industry statistics for 2017 
(according to the EU’s PRODCOM list of products) were published in December 2018. Some 
tourism statistics and transport statistics are transmitted to Eurostat, but they are not yet fully 
compliant with the acquis. Statistics on research, development and innovation are not 
produced on a regular basis. KAS published the results of an information and communication 
technologies (ICT) survey for households in January 2019 but has still not conducted a survey 
on ICT usage by enterprises.   
In the area of social statistics, only demographic ones are broadly in line with the acquis. As 
a matter of priority, KAS should ensure resources and continue preparations for the 2021 
population census, with full coverage of Kosovo territory. In 2018, for the first time, KAS 
conducted a full-scale survey of income and living conditions (regular EU-SILC) according to 
EU methodology and it intends to repeat the exercise on an annual basis. Some improvements 
have been made to the labour force survey (LFS): an annual and quarterly LFS are carried out 
and the publication timeframe has improved. However, Eurostat has not yet accepted the data. 
Some social protection statistics are produced but unemployment statistics remain unreliable. 


===== PAGE 90 =====
 
89 
 
Education statistics are still not produced according to international education classification 
standards (ISCED 2011). A labour cost index, structure of earnings data and job vacancy 
statistics are still not produced. Public health and crime statistics are not yet in line with EU 
standards. 
For agricultural statistics, KAS publishes data on annual agricultural crops and livestock 
production, and orchard statistics. The agricultural holding survey is produced regularly and 
in line with the acquis. There are no plans to conduct a farm structure survey this year, but 
KAS is carrying out a crop and livestock survey instead. Agricultural price indices and 
economic accounts for agriculture are produced on a regular basis, but supply balance sheets 
and an agriculture labour index are not yet produced.  
Energy and environment statistics are partly in line with the acquis. KAS has increased the 
number of statistical products sent to Eurostat, but many required statistics either did not meet 
EU standards or were not produced at all. In April 2018, statistics on energy consumption in 
the residential sector were published for the first time, but only for reference year 2015, which 
is of limited use. Monthly data and the monthly share of renewables are not provided to 
Eurostat. The first report on energy efficiency statistics was published in March 2018 
according to Eurostat requirements. Such reporting should be improved further, which would 
also facilitate evidence-based planning of projects by the new Energy Efficiency Fund. Waste 
and water statistics are produced regularly. Greenhouse gas emission statistics are collected 
but the information is not published regularly. Kosovo is starting to publish statistics on air 
pollution. Environmental statistics on environment-related taxes, protection expenditure and 
material flow balances are not yet produced. 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 91 =====
 
90 
 
ANNEX I – RELATIONS BETWEEN THE EU AND KOSOVO  
On 1 April 2016, the EU-Kosovo Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) entered 
into force. The SAA constitutes the first contractual relationship between the EU and Kosovo. 
It is a comprehensive agreement that provides a framework for political dialogue and covers 
cooperation in a wide variety of sectors, including justice and home affairs, trade, education, 
employment, energy, environment and a range of other policy areas. Three Stabilisation and 
Association Council meetings, and three cycles of subcommittee meetings took place since 
2016.  
To guide reforms under the implementation of the SAA, the Commission and Kosovo adopted 
in November 2016 the European Reform Agenda (ERA) for Kosovo. The Agenda outlines 
priority actions in the fields of good governance and the rule of law, competitiveness and 
investment climate, and employment and education.  
Since 2012, the Commission has issued five reports on Kosovo's progress towards visa 
liberalisation (the most recent in May 2016 and June 2018). On 18 July 2018, the 
Commission confirmed that Kosovo has met the two outstanding visa liberalisation 
requirements on the ratification of the border demarcation agreement with Montenegro and a 
strengthened track-record in the fight against crime and corruption, thus fulfilling all 
benchmarks set out in the Visa Liberalisation Roadmap. In March 2019, the European 
Parliament voted in support of the Commission proposal in its first reading. The proposal is 
pending in the Council. 
As regards financial assistance, the Instrument for Pre-Accession (IPA) 2018 programme for 
Kosovo was adopted in December 2018 with an EU contribution totalling EUR 90.5 million, 
complemented by co-financing from Kosovo for an overall budget of EUR 94.8 million. Two 
sector budget support operations are being implemented in Kosovo: public administration 
reform (PAR) under IPA 2016 (EUR 25 million) and public financial management (PFM) 
under IPA 2017 (EUR 25 million). In 2018, the EU Office in Kosovo signed 139 contracts for 
a total amount of EUR 89 million. It continued to ensure the co-ordination of donors active in 
Kosovo by organising – together with the Kosovo Ministry of European Integration – regular 
donor co-ordination meetings.  
On 17 July 2017, the Council approved the Framework Agreement between the European 
Union and Kosovo on the general principles for the participation of Kosovo in Union 
programmes. In 2018, Kosovo joined the Erasmus+, COSME, Europe for Citizens and 
Creative Europe programmes.  
The Kosovo Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor's Office, established to investigate 
and prosecute allegations stemming from the 2011 Council of Europe Report, which alleges 
serious violations of international law, continued their work. 
Since 2008, the European Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) has been assisting 
Kosovo authorities in establishing sustainable and independent rule of law institutions. Within 
its current mandate (June 2018-June 2020), the Mission undertakes monitoring activities and 
has limited executive functions.  
To date, according to the government, Kosovo has been recognised by 114 countries, 
including 23 EU Member States.  
During the reporting period, the UN Secretary-General continued to provide regular updates 
on the implementation of the UN's mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). He notably raised concern 
about the tension between Belgrade and Pristina and called on leaders from both sides to 


===== PAGE 92 =====
 
91 
 
avoid any action that could further raise tensions, encouraging them to make conciliatory 
gestures and seek ways to reengage and work towards progress in the EU-facilitated dialogue.  
The NATO-led Kosovo Force (KFOR) has continued to help ensure a safe and secure 
environment in Kosovo. In February 2019, it had 3 525 personnel. 
 


===== PAGE 93 =====
 
 
92 
 
ANNEX II – STATISTICAL ANNEX 
STATISTICAL DATA (as of 29.04.2019) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kosovo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Basic data 
Note 
2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Population (thousand) 
 
2 100 
1 816b 
1 821 
1 805b 
1 772 
1 784 
Total area of the country (km²) 
1) 
10 908 
10 908 
10 908 
10 908 
10 908 
10 905b 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National accounts 
Note 
2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Gross domestic product (GDP) (million euro) 
 
: 
5 327 
5 568 
5 807 
6 070 
6 414 
GDP (euro per capita) 
 
: 
2 900 
3 100 
3 200 
3 400 
3 600 
GDP per capita (in purchasing power standards (PPS)) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
GDP per capita (in PPS), relative to the EU average (EU-28 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Real GDP growth rate: change on previous year of GDP volume (%) 
 
: 
3.4 
1.2 
4.1 
4.1 
4.2 
Employment growth (national accounts data), relative to the previous 
year (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Labour productivity growth: growth in GDP (in volume) per person 
employed, relative to the previous year (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Unit labour cost growth, relative to the previous year (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
**3 year change (T/T-3) in the nominal unit labour cost growth index 
(2010 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Labour productivity per person employed: GDP (in PPS) per person 
employed relative to EU average (EU-28 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Gross value added by main sectors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 94 =====
 
 
93 
 
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries (%) 
 
: 
14.4 
14.3 
12.6 
13.0 
11.4 
Industry (%) 
 
: 
20.3 
19.4 
20.8 
21.5 
21.8 
Construction (%) 
 
: 
7.9 
7.3 
8.4 
8.1 
9.9 
Services (%) 
 
: 
57.4 
59 
58.2 
57.4 
56.9 
Final consumption expenditure, as a share of GDP (%) 
 
: 
100.1 
102.9 
100.9 
100.0 
97.5 
Gross fixed capital formation, as a share of GDP (%) 
 
: 
24.8 
23.2 
25.8 
25.5 
27.0 
Changes in inventories, as a share of GDP (%) 
 
: 
2.8 
2.5 
1.8 
1.6 
1.4 
Exports of goods and services, relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
21.9 
22.5 
21.9 
23.7 
26.7 
Imports of goods and services, relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
49.7 
51.2 
50.4 
50.9 
52.5 
Gross fixed capital formation by the general government sector, as a 
percentage of GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business 
Note 
2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Industrial production volume index (2010 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Number of active enterprises (number) 
 
: 
30 803 
31 420 
35 472 
33 274 
34 355 
Birth rate: number of enterprise births in the reference period (t) divided 
by the number of enterprises active in t (%) 
 
: 
8.5 
9.0 
11.7 
9.2 
8.7 
Death rate: number of enterprise deaths in the reference period (t) 
divided by the number of enterprises active in t (%) 
 
: 
4.4 
5.3 
8.3p 
15.8p 
: 
People employed in SMEs as a share of all persons employed (within the 
non-financial business economy) (%) 
 
: 
74.8 
76.6 
78.3 
78.5 
78.8 
Value added by SMEs (in the non-financial business economy) (EUR 
million) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Total value added (in the non-financial business economy) (EUR 
million) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 


===== PAGE 95 =====
 
 
94 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inflation rate and house prices 
Note 
2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Harmonised consumer price index (HICP), change relative to the 
previous year (%) 
2) 
0.6 
1.7 
0.4 
-0.5 
0.3 
1.5 
**Annual change in the deflated house price index (2010 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Balance of payments 
Note 
2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Balance of payments: current account total (million euro) 
 
-226 
-179 
-385 
-497 
-481 
-383 
Balance of payments current account: trade balance (million euro) 
 
-1 164 
-1 996 
-2 059 
-2 109 
-2 291 
-2 464 
Balance of payments current account: net services (million euro) 
 
20 
520 
460 
457 
639 
794 
Balance of payments current account: net balance for primary income 
(million euro) 
 
159 
122 
114 
93 
75 
127 
Balance of payments current account: net balance for secondary income 
(million euro) 
 
759 
1 175 
1 100 
1 062 
1 096 
1 161 
Net balance for primary and secondary income: of which government 
transfers (million euro) 
 
320 
370 
291 
202 
204 
196 
**3 year backward moving average of the current account balance 
relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
-7.3 
-5.4 
-6.3 
-7.8 
-7.5 
**Five year change in share of world exports of goods and services (%) 
 
: 
: 
11.51 
6.03 
6.86 
25.61 
Net balance (inward - outward) of foreign direct investment (FDI) 
(million euro) 
 
289.2 
250.2 
123.8 
271.8 
177.2 
212.0 
Foreign direct investment (FDI) abroad (million euro) 
 
5.6 
30.0 
27.3 
37.1 
42.7 
43.4 
of which FDI of the reporting economy in the EU-28 countries (million 
euro) 
 
: 
67.0 
28.4 
89.1 
25.7 
16.3 
Foreign direct investment (FDI) in the reporting economy (million euro) 
 
294.8 
280.2 
151.2 
308.8 
220.0 
255.4 


===== PAGE 96 =====
 
 
95 
 
of which FDI of the EU-28 countries in the reporting economy (million 
euro) 
 
: 
88.5 
38.5 
100.2 
41.2 
123.5 
**Net international investment position, relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
4.9 
3.5 
-0.7 
-1.3 
-1.8 
Year on year rate of change in gross inflow of remittances (in national 
currency) from migrant workers (%) 
 
11.8 
11.0 
8.5 
6.9 
3.8 
9.9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Public finance 
Note 
2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
***General government deficit / surplus, relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
***General government gross debt relative to GDP (%) 
 
0.0 
8.9e 
10.6e 
13.1e 
14.6e 
16.6e 
Total  government revenues, as a percentage of GDP (%) 
 
: 
26.8 
26.3 
29.6 
: 
: 
Total government expenditure, as a percentage of GDP (%) 
 
: 
28.2 
27.1 
28.0 
: 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Financial indicators 
Note 
2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Gross external debt of the whole economy, relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
30.2 
31.2 
33.3 
33.2 
32.6 
Gross external debt of the whole economy, relative to total exports (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Money supply: M1 (banknotes, coins, overnight deposits, million euro) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Money supply: M2 (M1 plus deposits with maturity up to two years, 
million euro) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Money supply: M3 (M2 plus marketable instruments, million euro) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Total credit by monetary financial institutions to residents (consolidated) 
(million euro) 
 
637 
1 878 
1 957 
2 153 
: 
: 
**Annual change in financial sector liabilities (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
**Private credit flow, consolidated, relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
**Private debt, consolidated, relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 


===== PAGE 97 =====
 
 
96 
 
Interest rates: day-to-day money rate, per annum (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Lending interest rate (one year), per annum (%) 
3) 
14.50 
11.82 
10.61 
8.32 
7.47 
6.83 
Deposit interest rate (one year), per annum (%) 
3) 
3.00 
3.43 
1.11 
0.90 
1.01 
1.04 
Euro exchange rates: average of period (1 euro = … national currency) 
 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Trade-weighted effective exchange rate index, 42 countries (2005 = 100) 
 
100 
102 
102 
102 
102 
103 
**3 year change (T/T-3) in the trade-weighted effective exchange rate 
index, 42 countries (2005 = 100) 
 
: 
1.3 
0.9 
0.4 
0.1 
0.7 
Value of reserve assets (including gold) (million euro) 
 
356 
694 
645 
706 
605 
683 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
External trade in goods 
Note 
2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Value of imports: all goods, all partners (million euro) 
 
1 315 
2 449 
2 538 
2 635 
2 789 
3 047 
Value of exports: all goods, all partners (million euro) 
 
82 
294 
325 
325 
310 
378 
Trade balance: all goods, all partners (million euro) 
 
-1 233 
-2 155 
-2 214 
-2 309 
-2 480 
-2 669 
Terms of trade (export price index / import price index * 100) (number) 
 
: 
97 
107 
107 
101 
107 
Share of exports to EU-28 countries in value of total exports (%) 
 
36.6 
40.1 
30.2 
32.6 
22.6 
24.9 
Share of imports from EU-28 countries in value of total imports (%) 
 
36.3 
44.2 
42.6 
42.2 
43.1 
43.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Demography 
Note 
2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Crude rate of natural change of population (natural growth rate): number 
of births minus deaths (per thousand inhabitants) 
 
12.6 
: 
13.2be 
9.2p 
8.4p 
8.2 
Infant mortality rate deaths of children under one year of age (per 
thousand live births) 
 
12.0 
: 
: 
9.7 
8.5 
9.7 
Life expectancy at birth: male (years) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
75.9p 
: 
Life expectancy at birth: female (years) 
  
: 
: 
: 
: 
81.6p 
: 


===== PAGE 98 =====
 
 
97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Labour market 
Note 
2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Economic activity rate for persons aged 20–64: proportion of the 
population aged 20–64 that is economically active (%) 
 
: 
46.4 
47.7 
42.8 
44.0 
49.0 
*Employment rate for persons aged 20–64: proportion of the population 
aged 20–64 that are in employment (%) 
 
: 
33.0 
31.3 
29.1 
32.3 
34.4 
Male employment rate for persons aged 20–64 (%) 
 
: 
51.5 
48.4 
44.9 
49.9 
54.0 
Female employment rate for persons aged 20–64 (%) 
 
: 
14.9 
14.5 
13.2 
14.6 
14.6 
Employment rate for persons aged 55–64: proportion of the population 
aged 55–64 that are in employment (%) 
 
26.3 
30.8 
29.8 
27.2 
29.6 
32.7 
Employment by main sectors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries (%) 
 
21.4 
5.9 
2.6 
2.3 
4.2 
4.4 
Industry (%) 
 
12.4 
16.8 
17.7 
18.7 
18.0 
17.4 
Construction (%) 
 
8.1 
11.4 
10.9 
9.5 
11.5 
12.9 
Services (%) 
 
: 
65.9 
68.8 
69.5 
66.3 
65.3 
People employed in the public sector as a share of total employment, 
persons aged 20–64 (%) 
 
: 
31.5 
31.4 
32.6 
30.8 
28.4 
People employed in the private sector as a share of total employment, 
persons aged 20–64 (%) 
 
: 
68.5 
68.6 
67.4 
69.2 
71.6 
Unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force that is unemployed 
(%) 
 
44.9 
30.0 
35.3 
32.9 
27.5 
30.3 
Male unemployment rate (%) 
 
34.6 
26.9 
33.1 
31.8 
26.2 
28.5 
Female unemployment rate (%) 
 
61.6 
38.8 
41.6 
36.6 
31.7 
36.4 
Youth unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force aged 15–24 
that is unemployed (%) 
 
75.5 
55.9 
61.0 
57.7 
52.4 
52.7 


===== PAGE 99 =====
 
 
98 
 
Long-term unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force that has 
been unemployed for 12 months or more (%) 
 
18.5 
20.7 
26.1 
23.8 
18.0 
21.7 
Unemployment rate for persons (aged 25–64) having completed at most 
lower secondary education (ISCED levels 0-2) (%) 
 
: 
37.3 
44.0 
45.5 
29.6 
32.5 
Unemployment rate for persons (aged 25–64) having completed tertiary 
education (ISCED levels 5-8) (%) 
 
: 
13.4 
17.1 
17.4 
15.6 
22.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social cohesion 
Note 
2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Average nominal monthly wages and salaries (national currency) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Index of real wages and salaries (index of nominal wages and salaries 
divided by the inflation index) (2010 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
GINI coefficient 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Poverty gap 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
*Early leavers from education and training: proportion of the population 
aged 18–24 with at most lower secondary education who are not in 
further education or training (%) 
 
: 
18.4 
16.5 
14.5 
12.7 
12.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Standard of living 
Note 
2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Number of passenger cars relative to population size (number per 
thousand population) 
 
69.9 
122.5b 
129.7 
156.1b 
146.8 
153.6 
Number of mobile phone subscriptions relative to population size 
(number per thousand population) 
 
: 
: 
464.3 
487.8 
545.0 
553.1 
Mobile broadband penetration (per 100 inhabitants) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
1 
Fixed broadband penetration (per 100 inhabitants) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 100 =====
 
 
99 
 
Infrastructure 
Note 
2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Density of railway network (lines in operation per thousand km²) 
 
: 
30.9 
30.9 
30.9 
30.9 
30.9 
Length of motorways (kilometres) 
 
0 
78 
78 
80 
98 
108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Innovation and research 
Note 
2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Public expenditure on education relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
3.8 
3.7 
4.5 
4.6 
4.4 
*Gross domestic expenditure on R&D relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Government budget appropriations or outlays on R&D (GBAORD), as a 
percentage of GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Percentage of households who have internet access at home (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
88.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environment 
Note 
2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
*Index of greenhouse gas emissions,  CO2 equivalent (1990 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Energy intensity of the economy (kg of oil equivalent per 1 000 euro 
GDP at 2010 constant prices) 
 
: 
473.2 
448.3 
490.3 
504.6 
459.9 
Electricity generated from renewable sources relative to gross electricity 
consumption (%) 
 
: 
3.7 
4.0 
3.6 
6.2 
4.4 
Road share of inland freight transport (based on tonne-km) (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Energy 
Note 
2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Primary production of all energy products (thousand TOE) 
 
1 424 
1 792 
1 605 
1 804 
2 016 
1 793 
Primary production of crude oil (thousand TOE) 
 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Primary production of solid fuels (thousand TOE) 
 
1 248 
1 532 
1 342 
1 536 
1 640 
1 412 
Primary production of gas (thousand TOE) 
 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 


===== PAGE 101 =====
 
 
100 
 
Net imports of all energy products (thousand TOE) 
 
581 
505 
603 
697 
638 
769 
Gross inland energy consumption (thousand TOE) 
 
1 970 
2 312 
2 217 
2 524 
2 704 
2 569 
Gross electricity generation (GWh) 
 
4 434 
6 525 
5 436 
6 119 
5 981 
5 918 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture 
Note 
2006 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Agricultural production volume index of goods and services (at producer 
prices) (2010 = 100) 
 
102.7 
117.6 
93.3 
103.7 
: 
: 
Utilised agricultural area (thousand hectares) 
4) 5) 
401 
442 
416e 
411 
417 
417 
Livestock numbers: live bovine animals (thousand heads, end of period) 
5) 6) 
382 
321 
270e 
259 
265 
260 
Livestock numbers: live swine (thousand heads, end of period) 
5) 6) 
68 
49 
46e 
44 
42 
41 
Livestock numbers: live sheep and live goats (thousand heads, end of 
period) 
5) 6) 
113 
160 
234 
224 
212 
211 
Raw milk available on farms (thousand tonnes) 
6) 
: 
: 
: 
: 
376 
332 
Harvested crop production: cereals (including rice) (thousand tonnes) 
7) 
392 
540 
465e 
444 
563 
478 
Harvested crop production: sugar beet (thousand tonnes) 
 
0 
0 
0 
: 
: 
: 
Harvested crop production: vegetables (thousand tonnes) 
6) 
142 
158 
170e 
145 
186 
182 
 
 
: = not available 
b = break in series 
e = estimate 
p = provisional 
* = Europe 2020 indicator 
** = Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure (MIP) indicator 
*** = The government deficit and debt data of enlargement countries are published on an "as 
is" basis and without any assurance as regards their quality and adherence to ESA rules. 
 


===== PAGE 102 =====
 
 
101 
 
Footnotes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1) The change of the total area between 2016 and 2017 reflects measurements made by the 
Kosovo Cadastral Agency. 
2) 2006, 2013 and 2014: consumer price index. 
3) 2013 and 2014: includes disbursement fee charged by banks. 
4) Including agricultural common land. 
5) 2014: data from the 2014 agriculture census.  
6) 2014-2017: results for four municipalities in the north of Kosovo which did not participate 
in the census/surveys are estimated. 
7) Excluding rice. 
