===== PAGE 1 =====
 
EN 
 
 EN 
 
 
EUROPEAN 
COMMISSION 
Brussels, 30.10.2024  
SWD(2024) 694 final 
 
COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT 
Montenegro 2024 Report 
Accompanying the document 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN 
PARLIAMENT, THE COUNCIL, THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL 
COMMITTEE AND THE COMMITTEE OF REGIONS 
2024 Communication on EU enlargement policy             
             
 
{COM(2024) 690 final} - {SWD(2024) 690 final} - {SWD(2024) 691 final} -
 {SWD(2024) 692 final} - {SWD(2024) 693 final} - {SWD(2024) 695 final} -
 {SWD(2024) 696 final} - {SWD(2024) 697 final} - {SWD(2024) 698 final} -
 {SWD(2024) 699 final} 
 


===== PAGE 2 =====
 
1 
 
Contents 
1. 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................ 3 
1.1.  CONTEXT 3 
1.2. Main findings of the reports ................................................................................................. 4 
1.3. 
State of play of the accession negotiations .................................................................. 20 
2. CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS ........................................... 22 
2.1. Functioning of democratic institutions and public administration reform ...................... 22 
2.1.1 Democracy ............................................................................................................. 22 
2.1.2. Public administration reform ............................................................................... 24 
2.2.1 
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights .............................................. 27 
2.2.2 
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security .................................................... 43 
2.3. Economic criteria................................................................................................................. 52 
2.3.1. The existence of a functioning market economy................................................ 52 
2.3.2. The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within 
the EU ............................................................................................................... 56 
2.4 Public Procurement, Statistics, Financial control ............................................................... 58 
Chapter 5 - Public procurement ...................................................................................... 58 
Chapter 18 - Statistics ..................................................................................................... 59 
Chapter 32 - Financial control......................................................................................... 60 
3. 
GOOD NEIGHBOURLY RELATIONS AND REGIONAL COOPERATION ...................................... 61 
4. ABILITY TO ASSUME THE OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP ........................................................ 63 
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods ............................................................................. 63 
Chapter 2 - Freedom of movement for workers ............................................................ 64 
Chapter 3 - Right of establishment and freedom to provide services.......................... 65 
Chapter 4 - Free movement of capital ............................................................................ 65 
Chapter 6 - Company law ................................................................................................ 66 
Chapter 7 - Intellectual property law .............................................................................. 67 
Chapter 8 - Competition policy ....................................................................................... 68 
Chapter 9 - Financial services ......................................................................................... 69 
Chapter 28 - Consumer and health protection .............................................................. 69 
Cluster 3: Competitiveness and inclusive growth .................................................................... 71 
Chapter 10 - Digital transformation and media ............................................................. 71 
Chapter 16 - Taxation ...................................................................................................... 72 
Chapter 17 - Economic and monetary policy ................................................................. 72 
Chapter 19 - Social policy and employment .................................................................. 73 
Chapter 20 - Enterprise and industrial policy ................................................................. 75 
Chapter 25 - Science and research ................................................................................ 76 
Chapter 26 - Education and culture ................................................................................ 76 
Chapter 29 - Customs union ........................................................................................... 78 
Cluster 4: The Green agenda and sustainable connectivity ..................................................... 79 
Chapter 14 - Transport policy ......................................................................................... 79 
Chapter 15 - Energy ......................................................................................................... 80 
Chapter 21 - Trans-European networks ......................................................................... 81 
Chapter 27 - Environment and climate change ............................................................. 82 
Cluster 5: Resources, agriculture and cohesion ....................................................................... 84 


===== PAGE 3 =====
 
2 
 
Chapter 11 - Agriculture and rural development ........................................................... 84 
Chapter 12 - Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy ..................................... 85 
Chapter 13 - Fisheries and aquaculture ......................................................................... 86 
Chapter 22 - Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments ................... 87 
Chapter 33 - Financial and budgetary provisions .......................................................... 87 
Cluster 6: External relations ....................................................................................................... 88 
Chapter 30 - External relations ....................................................................................... 88 
Chapter 31 - Foreign, security and defence policy ........................................................ 89 
Annex I – Relations between the EU and Montenegro ............................................................. 91 
Annex  II – Statistical data ......................................................................................................... 93 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 4 =====
 
3 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION1  
1.1.  
CONTEXT 
Accession negotiations with Montenegro were opened in June 2012. To date, 33 negotiating 
chapters have been opened, of which three have been provisionally closed. Montenegro 
continued to broadly implement the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) and 
meetings of the joint bodies under the agreement took place at regular intervals.  
Overall, the government accelerated preparations on EU accession and worked effectively, in 
particular on meeting the requirements stemming from the interim benchmarks of chapters 
23 and 24. On 26 June 2024, the 16th meeting of the Accession Conference with Montenegro 
confirmed that Montenegro overall met the interim benchmarks for chapters 23 and 24 and 
adopted the closing benchmarks for these chapters. This opens a new phase in the 
accession negotiations, with the possibility to proceed with provisionally closing further 
chapters. To do so, it will be essential for Montenegro to establish a track record of 
implementation and deliver results on the ground. 
The political commitment of the Montenegrin authorities to the strategic goal of European 
integration has been consistently stated as the key priority for the country and staying firm 
on EU strategic orientation remains key. Since its formation in October 2023, the 
government has been operating in a generally stable political environment, with less 
polarisation compared to recent years.  
However, the country and its institutions are fragile and vulnerable to political crisis and 
potential institutional blockages. No nationwide elections took place; local elections were 
held in five municipalities. Overall, the electoral framework requires a comprehensive 
revision. The parliament elected in June 2023 held its first session at the end of October 
2023 and has generally been operating regularly, largely with consensus on key EU related 
reforms.  
Montenegro has actively engaged in implementing the new Growth Plan for the Western 
Balkans across its four pillars: (i) gradual integration with the EU’s Single Market, (ii) regional 
economic integration, (iii) fundamental reforms and (iv) increased financial support.   
Significant efforts have been made on gradual integration.  On 26 September 2024 
Montenegro adopted its Reform Agenda, as envisaged under the Reform and Growth 
Facility2. The Reform Agenda covers reform milestones in the areas of: (1) business 
environment and private sector development; (2) digital and green transition; (3) human 
capital development and (4) fundamental rights and the rule of law.  
The Commission’s 2024 rule of law report also covered Montenegro for the first time.  
 
 
1 The 2024 report is presented in a renewed format and structure. Main findings of the report, together with the 
recommendations (previously grey assessment boxes) are brought together at the beginning of the report. 
Furthermore, under the fundamentals cluster, for better readability and comparability across all reports, 
certain data is provided (also) in the form of graphs. 
2 OJ L, 2024/1449, 24.5.2024 


===== PAGE 5 =====
 
4 
 
1.2. MAIN FINDINGS OF THE REPORTS3 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
Democracy  
While the conduct of the elections is mostly satisfactory overall, the legal framework 
requires a comprehensive reform and alignment with EU law of the election legislation, 
voting and candidacy rights restrictions, transparency, mechanisms of dispute resolution, 
and oversight of campaign finance and media. The majority of pending OSCE/ODIHR 
recommendations have not been addressed. Montenegro should further strive to align its 
electoral processes to highest democratic standards. 
Parliament can exercise its powers in a mostly satisfactory way. Despite the persisting 
fragmentation of the parliamentary landscape, a majority has emerged since  October 2023, 
ending a prolonged period of political instability. Consensus on key EU accession related 
reforms extended to both ends of the political spectrum and EU-related legislation was 
adopted by unanimity in Parliament. However, tensions and inter-ethnic polarisation has 
resurfaced, having an adverse impact on political stability. During the summer of 2024 the 
Parliament took some hasty legislative initiatives failing to apply the necessary 
transparency. 
Montenegro has put in place a revised set of institutional structures that have been 
delivering adequately on the integration process. A new negotiation structure in charge of EU 
accession negotiations, headed by the Chief Negotiator, adequately fulfils its role of 
coordinating the country’s EU accession negotiations. The coordinating role of the Ministry 
of European Affairs should be strengthened, and additional resources and expertise added. 
The government has been holding regular sessions. However, recurring internal rifts 
between certain ministers and the Prime Minister have undermined the government’s 
cohesion and overall effectiveness. 
Civil society organisations (CSOs) in Montenegro operate in an enabling environment. The 
main legal and institutional framework for civil society to operate freely is in place. The role 
of civil society in policy making is formalised, yet at times purely symbolic. The Council for 
Cooperation between the Government and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) has not 
resumed work. Further efforts are needed to ensure genuine and meaningful cooperation 
between the government and CSOs.  
Public administration reform  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in this area. Overall, limited progress was made. Some 
measures were taken to improve the capital investment planning and management, notably 
by setting up a Public Investments Council, but more effort is needed to improve the public 
 
3 This report covers the period from 15 June 2023 to 1 September 2024. It is based on input from a variety of 
sources, including contributions from the government of Montenegro, EU Member States, European Parliament 
reports and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also includes the 
results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule 
of law.  
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of 
preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made 
during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, 
good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been used. 
 


===== PAGE 6 =====
 
5 
 
investment management framework. The number of requests for public information and 
related appeals further increased.   
The Commission's recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ adopt and implement amendments to the Law on access to information, in line with the 
principles of good public administration, and introduce measures to reduce the high 
number of requests for information and related appeals;  
→ amend and implement the Law on civil servants and state employees and the Law on 
local self-government, to ensure that recruitment follows the principles of merit, 
competence and transparency;  
→ put in place a unified, comprehensive and transparent system for capital investment 
planning and management.  
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights 
Montenegro remains moderately prepared to apply the EU acquis and European standards in 
this area and has made good progress overall. Good progress was achieved as regards 
justice reform, the fight against corruption, and freedom of expression and media freedom, 
with substantial reforms to the legislative and strategic frameworks. In June 2024, the 
European Commission assessed in its interim benchmark assessment report that 
Montenegro had fulfilled the interim benchmarks for chapter 23, and consequently the 
closing benchmarks for chapter 23 were set.  
Functioning of the judiciary  
Montenegro’s judicial system is moderately prepared and has made good progress on key 
judicial reforms and last year’s recommendations. A new strategic framework was put in 
place, and substantial amendments were adopted to the Law on Judicial Council and 
Judges, the Law on State Prosecution Service, and the Law on Special State Prosecution 
Service aiming to align them with the EU acquis and European standards, based on the 
European and Venice Commissions’ recommendations. Further efforts will need to be 
ensured to continue their alignment. Progress was made on transparent and merit-based 
high-level judicial appointments, following a long period of standstill. The Parliament 
appointed by qualified majority a new permanent Supreme State Prosecutor, three members 
of the Judicial Council and one judge of the Constitutional Court, and only a permanent 
President of the Supreme Court remains to be appointed. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were largely met. In the coming year, 
Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ appoint a permanent President of the Supreme Court, as well as other high-level judicial 
positions, through a merit-based and transparent procedure, to ensure the proper 
functioning and accountability of the justice system; 
→ ensure full and effective implementation of the improved strategic and legal framework 
to address existing challenges, and further align the legal framework, including the 
Constitution, in particular on the composition and decision making process of the 
Judicial Council, with the EU acquis and European standards on judicial independence, 
accountability, impartiality, integrity, efficiency, and professionalism of the judicial 
system, addressing the remaining recommendations from the European Commission, 
the Venice Commission and the Council of Europe Group of States against Corruption 
(GRECO), to decisively restore the stability, credibility and public trust in the justice 
system;  


===== PAGE 7 =====
 
6 
 
→ fully implement the Plan for the rationalisation of court network and the Strategy for 
digitalisation of the judiciary, to improve human, financial, and physical infrastructure in 
the judiciary and state prosecution service.  
Fight against corruption  
Montenegro is between having some level of preparation and a moderate level of 
preparation in the fight against corruption. Good progress was made on key reforms and 
last year’s recommendations. The strategic framework has improved with the adoption of a 
new a new 2024-2028 Anticorruption Strategy, aiming to align it with European and 
international standards, by addressing prevention and repression of corruption, as well as 
international cooperation. Likewise, the legal framework was substantially upgraded with the 
adoption of a new Law on Prevention of Corruption and amendments to the Law on 
Confiscation, with the aim to align them with European standards by addressing existing 
loopholes. In addition, a new Law on lobbying was adopted, in line with the EU acquis and 
European standards. New guidelines were adopted to improve the use of plea bargain 
agreements by prosecutors and judges in corruption cases, including high-level corruption, 
to ensure an effective and deterrent criminal justice response.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were largely met. In the coming year, 
Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ ensure full and effective implementation of the improved strategic and legal 
frameworks to address existing challenges, and continue its alignment with the EU 
acquis and European standards on prevention and fight against corruption by 
addressing the remaining recommendations from the European Commission, the 
Venice Commission and the Council of Europe Group of States against Corruption 
(GRECO) and peer review missions, including on its institutional set up and effective 
functioning;  
→ further improve the track record on corruption, including high-level corruption, by 
urgently strengthening the effective enforcement of the existing criminal legislation by 
the prosecution and courts, including by imposing effective and deterrent penalties; 
→ urgently amend Law on financing of political entities and election campaign to address 
the existing shortcomings and bring it fully in line with European standards, to 
substantially increase transparency and control of the spending of political parties, and 
prevent the abuse of state resources, including through dissuasive sanctions. 
Fundamental rights  
The legislative and institutional framework on fundamental rights is largely in place and 
Montenegro continues to largely meet its international obligations on human rights. 
However, more effort is needed to fully implement this framework and to ensure access to 
justice and enforcement of rights in administrative and judicial proceedings, in particular for 
vulnerable groups. The most vulnerable groups in society (including Roma and Egyptians, 
persons with disabilities, LGBTIQ persons) continued to be subjected to discrimination, hate 
speech and hate crime. More effort is needed to effectively address all recommendations 
from the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading 
Treatment (CPT). 
The Commission's recommendations from last year were partially implemented, with 
substantial progress in drafting a new anti-discrimination law, and the revision of relevant 
criminal legislation, and remain largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro needs in 
particular to: 
→ make substantial progress in implementing all pending recommendations of the 


===== PAGE 8 =====
 
7 
 
European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment 
(CPT);  
→ make substantial progress in implementing the Strategy for the Advancement of the 
Status of Roma4 and Egyptians in Montenegro, as well as commitments under the 
Poznan Declaration;  
→ adopt a new law on anti-discrimination and a new law on personal data protection, in line 
with the EU acquis, European and international standards.  
Freedom of expression 
Montenegro has a pluralistic media environment and is between having some level of 
preparation and moderate level of preparation  in the area of freedom of expression. Overall, 
good progress was achieved in the reporting period, notably with the adoption a media 
legislative package – new Media Law, new Law on Audiovisual Media Services and new Law 
on Public Broadcaster RTCG – in line with the EU acquis, and European standards, which 
was a key recommendation of last year’s report.   
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were largely implemented. In the 
coming year, Montenegro needs in particular to: 
→ continue to provide prompt and effective law enforcement and institutional protection to 
journalists against all forms of violence, while prioritising investigations and judicial 
follow-up in key cold cases;  
→ ensure consistent implementation of all media-related legislation and uphold a zero-
tolerance policy to any form of pressure or harassment of journalists, including by public 
officials;  
→ safeguard against any form of undue influence on the editorial, institutional or financial 
independence of the public broadcaster RTCG, which needs to comply fully with the law 
and with the highest standards of professional integrity and accountability. 
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security  
Montenegro has between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of justice, 
freedom and security. Montenegro has made good progress combating organised crime 
and on the management of migration and asylum. In June 2024, the European Commission 
assessed in its interim benchmark assessment report that Montenegro had fulfilled the 
interim benchmarks for chapter 24, and consequently the closing benchmarks for chapter 24 
were adopted.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ increase the efficiency of prosecution/adjudication for serious and organised crime 
cases, especially cases of money laundering; address the lengthiness of trials and 
frequent adjournments in organised crime cases; ensure the application of key legal 
concepts such as stand-alone money laundering (independent of the predicate crime) 
and quality of evidence by the courts and the prosecution; and ensure the seizure and 
confiscation of criminal assets – by systematic tracking of money flows, the efficient 
 
4 In line with the terminology of European institutions the umbrella term ‘Roma’ is used here to refer to a number 
of different groups, without denying the specificities of these groups. 
 


===== PAGE 9 =====
 
8 
 
use of special investigative measures and the consistent use of extended confiscation; 
→ further strengthen border management capacity by addressing critical gaps in border 
surveillance infrastructure and equipment; take the necessary steps to set up an 
advance passenger information system and a biometric migrant registration system; 
→ further align Montenegro’s visa policy with the EU’s list of visa-required countries, in line 
with the commitments taken in the Reform Agenda, in particular with regard to countries 
presenting irregular migration or security risks to the EU. 
 Fight against organised crime  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the fight against organised crime. Good progress 
was made with the adopted legislative amendments in the areas of money laundering and 
trafficking in human beings.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ make progress on filling vacancies in the Special Police Unit (SPU), SSPO and High Court 
of Podgorica; provide suitable premises to the SSPO and SPU and reorganise the Special 
Investigative Measure (SIM) division;  
→ further amend its legislation on weapons to align with EU acquis and international 
standards;  
→ address the risks of corruption and infiltration of organised crime into law enforcement 
agencies and the judiciary by implementing a strong prevention policy and providing a 
stringent judicial response to detected cases; urgently implement the reorganisation in 
the Ministry of Interior /police in the area of corruption prevention and internal control. 
ECONOMIC CRITERIA 
The existence of a functioning market economy 
Montenegro has made some progress and is moderately prepared in developing a 
functioning market economy. Strong economic growth and one-off revenues supported a 
small budget surplus in 2023, but fiscal vulnerabilities remain given high public financing 
needs, elevated interest rates and persistent social spending pressures. The labour market 
situation improved, but structural problems persist. The banking sector remained well 
capitalised and liquid. Some progress was made in improving the business environment and 
preparing the reform of state-owned enterprises (SOEs). 
Last year’s recommendations were addressed to some extent but remain mostly valid. To 
improve the functioning of the market economy, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ adopt and implement additional fiscal measures, which would help targeting the 
achievement of a budget deficit below 3% of GDP, and a public debt ratio converging 
towards 60% of GDP by 2026; 
→ implement the Law on budget and fiscal responsibility to set up a fiscal council, while 
ensuring full transparency in selecting its council members; and 
→ prepare an analysis of the economic and fiscal impact of current tax exemptions and a 
fiscal risk assessment of SOEs. 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the EU 
Montenegro has made limited progress and is moderately prepared to cope with 


===== PAGE 10 =====
 
9 
 
competitive pressure and market forces in the EU. The education system still faces 
numerous challenges, as shown by the results of international surveys. Efforts to advance a 
green and digital transition have continued, but large infrastructure gaps persist. Further 
efforts are needed to diversify Montenegro’s narrow production base. Obstacles to 
increasing the productivity and competitiveness of local firms include the low value added 
by domestic products, the small size of local companies and their low level of participation 
in exports. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and remain mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ continue implementing digital services for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises 
and prioritise the development and implementation of an interactive e-government 
platform for transactional electronic services; 
→ improve programmes for dual vocational education and training and tertiary education, 
in close cooperation with business associations, and providing work-based learning;  
→ improve the institutional and regulatory environment for the green transition and 
increase energy resilience by adopting the National Energy and Climate Plan and 
implementing energy efficiency legislation. 
Chapter 5 - Public procurement  
Montenegro has between a moderate and a good level of preparation in this area. Some 
progress was achieved in 2023 in further improving the functioning of the electronic 
procurement system. 
The Commission’s recommendation from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ increase the level of transparency regarding public procurement contracted under 
intergovernmental agreements and reduce the number of procurement procedures for 
which no contract notice is published; 
→ reach full compliance with the EU public procurement rules and principles in all cases. 
Chapter 18 - Statistics  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of statistics. Overall, some progress was 
made. In particular, the enumeration and data processing phases of the national population 
and housing census were completed. Measures were taken to reinforce the Statistical Oﬃce 
of Montenegro (MONSTAT), but challenges remain with human resources and infrastructure.  
The Commission's recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ start regular production and transmission to Eurostat of: (i) government financial 
statistics, which can be published; and (ii) properly completed tables for the excessive 
deficit procedure;  
→ strengthen the human and financial resources of MONSTAT so it can fully fulfil its 
responsibilities and retain expert staff; 
→ implement the agricultural census and publish the results of the national population and 
housing census, in line with EU requirements and recommendations.  
Chapter 32 - Financial control 


===== PAGE 11 =====
 
10 
 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of ﬁnancial control. Overall, limited progress 
was made.  Some effort was made to strengthen the centralised budget inspection function 
at the Ministry of Finance. The delegation of authority in the ﬁeld of ﬁnancial management 
and internal control remains limited.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ further operationalise the centralised budget inspection function in the Ministry of 
Finance, by allocating appropriate staff; 
→ extend the application of managerial accountability in public administration, with 
increased delegation of authority in the field of financial management and internal 
control; 
→ further align its legislation with the EU acquis on fraud prevention regarding the EU’s 
financial interests, by: (i) adopting amendments to the Criminal Code; (ii) further 
strengthening the coordination capacity of the National Anti-fraud Coordination Service; 
and (iii) adopting a new national anti-fraud strategy for 2024-2027.  
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET 
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods  
Montenegro is moderately prepared as regards the free movement of goods. Some 
progress was made on alignment with the EU acquis on chemicals, medicines for human 
and veterinary use, medical devices and on construction products, and on improving the 
capacity of the bodies working on the EU chemicals acquis.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ complete the alignment of its legislation with the EU acquis, notably on medicines, 
motor vehicles and market surveillance; 
→ complete all the measures necessary to ensure full membership of the Institute for 
Standardisation of Montenegro (ISME) in the European Committee for Standardisation 
(CEN) and the European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardisation (CENELEC); 
→ continue to strengthen the human and financial capacity of its quality infrastructure and 
market surveillance bodies.  
Chapter 2 - Freedom of movement for workers  
Montenegro has some level of preparation. Limited progress was made related to the 
conclusion of bilateral social security agreements. Initial steps were also taken to upgrade 
the administrative and technical capacity of the Employment Agency.  
Last year’s recommendations remain largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in 
particular: 
→ take decisive action to improve the functioning of the Employment Agency such that it 
promotes and implements relevant and evidence -based active labour market policies; 
→ adopt an action plan for implementing the EU acquis in this area and step up legislative 
alignment to implement EU acquis on free movement of workers upon accession;  
→ step up efforts to conclude bilateral social security agreements with all EU Member 
States, and at least with additional five Member States in the coming year.  


===== PAGE 12 =====
 
11 
 
Chapter 3 - Right of establishment and freedom to provide services  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in this area. Limited progress was made by adopting a 
new strategy for developing the postal services in 2024-2028, and in the area of services by 
establishing the Point of Single contact portal.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
partially valid especially the need to progress in the area concerning professional 
qualifications to advance on the closing benchmarks in this chapter. In the following period, 
Montenegro should in particular: 
→  adopt and finalise the justification grounds for each of the professions it regulates; 
→ amend the horizontal law on services to ensure full compliance with the EU Services 
Directive and adopt legislation to align at least 5 priority service sectors with the EU 
Services Directive, following the finalisation of an exhaustive mapping exercise regarding 
the state of play concerning alignment of Montenegrin sectoral legislation with the EU 
Services Directive;  
→ accelerate the alignment of the study programmes and finalise it for the seven sectoral 
professions (doctors of medicine, dental practitioners, architects, general care nurses, 
veterinary surgeons, pharmacists and midwives) with the Professional Qualifications 
Directive. 
Chapter 4 - Free movement of capital  
Montenegro is moderately prepared  in this area. Some progress was made mainly related 
to the adoption of the new Law on the prevention of money laundering and terrorist 
financing, amendments to the Law on games of chance and the adoption of secondary 
legislation on payment systems.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ continue aligning with the EU acquis on capital movements and payments, including on 
the acquisition of property rights by EU nationals; 
→ strengthen further the anti-money laundering supervision of the non-financial sector, 
particularly in high-risk areas such as games of chance, by further amending the Law on 
games of chance and the Law on the prevention of money laundering and terrorism 
financing.  
Chapter 6 - Company law  
Montenegro has good level of preparation in the area of company law. No progress was 
made.  
The Commission’s recommendation from last year were not implemented and remain valid. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ finalise, adopt and start implementing  (i) the draft company Law and Law on business 
organisations, to further align national legislation with the acquis on company law 
including on certain aspects of company law, which includes amongst others the 
conversion of documents and information recorded in the national business register 
into a machine readable and searchable format or structured data, the connection of the 
national business register with the EU Business Register Interconnection System (BRIS), 


===== PAGE 13 =====
 
12 
 
(ii) the  use of digital tools and processes, (iii) the  cross-border mergers, divisions, 
conversions and (iv) the encouragement of long-term shareholder engagement; 
→ complete alignment with: (i) the Transparency Directive, including the sanctioning 
regime and the Directive on the harmonisation of transparency requirements; and (ii) the 
Directive on accounting, as regards the financial reporting regime for micro and small 
companies and dividend distribution; 
→ finalise and adopt the revision of the Corporate Governance Code.  
Chapter 7 - Intellectual property law  
Montenegro is between having a good level of preparation and being well advanced in the 
area of intellectual property law. Very good  progress was made during the reporting period 
in aligning national legislation with the EU acquis namely by adopting amendments to the 
Law on copyright and related rights and through the adoption of the Law on ratification of 
the Geneva Act of the Lisbon Agreement on Appellations of Origin and Geographical 
Indications.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were fully implemented. In the coming 
year Montenegro should in particular: 
→ continue to reinforce the implementation of the intellectual property strategy 2023-2026, 
specifically addressing staff shortages, providing annual training to market inspectors 
on IPR matters and strengthening the IT capacity;    
→ improve criminal enforcement by, inter alia, adopting legislation and providing trainings 
to the relevant authorities; 
→ reestablish a fully functional online register of industrial property rights by end of 2024 
publicly available online; 
Chapter 8 - Competition policy  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in this area. No progress was made on last year’s 
recommendations. A decision on the prohibition of cartel practices was taken and 
secondary legislation on State aid was adopted.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not  implemented and remain  
valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ adopt the new Law on protection of competition and the new Law on control of State 
aid, ensuring further alignment with the EU acquis. Finalise and implement a plan to 
ensure the financial independence of the Agency for Protection of the Competition 
(APC) and judicial overview in compliance with the Directive to empower the 
competition authorities of the Member States to be more effective enforcers and to 
ensure the proper functioning of the internal market;  
→ strengthen administrative and judicial capacities in the area of antirust, mergers and 
State aid control, including by ensuring additional personnel, as well as specific 
measures to address identified gaps in judicial capacity;  
→ Montenegro should intensify its efforts to further improve its track record on antitrust, 
mergers and State aid, as well as to conclude the pending major investigations of 
benchmark State aid cases, and, if necessary, recover the funds in question. 
Chapter 9 - Financial services  


===== PAGE 14 =====
 
13 
 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of financial services. Limited progress was 
achieved, with some secondary legislation acts adopted by the central bank , while work 
continued on several legal acts on banking, insurance and capital markets.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
remain valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should: 
→ adopt EU-aligned legislation on capital requirements, bank resolution and supervision of 
financial conglomerates; 
→ continue working on alignment with the EU acquis on insurance, including Solvency II 
Directive; 
→ complete alignment with the EU laws on open-ended investment funds,  alternative 
investment funds and financial market infrastructures. 
Chapter 28 - Consumer and health protection 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of consumer and health protection. Some 
progress was made by strengthening the national Consumer Protection Council, by further 
alignment with the EU acquis on communicable diseases and the adoption of 2023-2027 
healthcare development strategy and 2023-2024 action plan.   
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ complete the alignment of national legislation with the EU consumer protection acquis 
and with the EU acquis on substances of human origin and on patients’ rights in cross-
border healthcare; 
→ further strengthen the role and effectiveness of the Council for Consumer Protection; 
→ develop a national strategy on immunisation, in line with the best international practices 
and methodologies. 
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH  
Chapter 10 - Digital transformation and media  
Montenegro has a good level of preparation in the area of digital transformation and media. 
Very good progress was made, with the adoption of the Law on audio-media visual services 
as part of a comprehensive media reform package and the adoption of the Law on electronic 
communication aligning with the European Electronic Communications Code. Through this 
Law, Montenegro brough its legislation in line with the EU acquis as regards the provisions 
on the independence of the national regulatory authority for electronic communications. In 
addition, the Agency for Electronic Media (AEM), now known as Agency for Audiovisual 
Media Services (AMU), was granted legal powers to impose fines. Montenegro launched 
public calls under the Digital Europe Programme.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented. In the coming year, 
Montenegro should in particular: 
→ adopt and implement the Law on information security, fully aligning with the Network 
and Information Security (NIS2) Directive;  
→ ensure it maintains a good track record on enforcing the EU acquis on electronic 
communications and audiovisual media services;  
→ proceed with additional recruitment of staff to fulfil the remaining planned posts, thus  


===== PAGE 15 =====
 
14 
 
strengthen 
further 
the 
administrative 
capacities 
in 
the 
field 
of 
electronic 
communications, information society services and audio-visual media services. 
Chapter 16 - Taxation  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of taxation. Overall, limited progress was 
made, mainly on further aligning the legislation on excise taxes and VAT and corporate 
income tax with the EU acquis. The separation of the Tax Administration from the former 
Revenue and Customs Administration entailed organisational changes and slowed down the 
development of administrative capacity and required infrastructure, notably as concerns the 
interconnection with the EU IT systems in the area of taxation.   
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ further remove indirect tax exemptions that are not aligned with the EU acquis including 
those on fuel supplied to pleasure boats, and introduce fuel markers to avoid misuse of 
reduced-rate fuel;  
→ increase staffing in the Tax Administration to the level necessary for effective and 
efficient operations, including fighting corruption, and provide extensive training in the 
fields of tax inspection and risk assessment;  
→ strengthen the technical capacity and infrastructure needed to apply the EU IT systems, 
such as the Excise Movement Control System (EMCS) and the VAT Information 
Exchange System (VIES), and the IT systems necessary for tax cooperation and 
exchanging information in the field of direct taxation.    
Chapter 17 - Economic and monetary policy  
Montenegro is moderately prepared and has made some progress in the area of economic 
and monetary policy. The implementation of the action plan for alignment with the EU acquis 
advanced. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should: 
→ continue to implement the revised action plan for alignment with the EU acquis under 
this chapter; 
→ ensure that the Ministry of Finance, the Central Bank of Montenegro and Monstat 
cooperate, coordinate among themselves and have appropriate capacity to produce 
government finance statistics and fiscal notifications in accordance with the ESA 2010 
methodology. 
Chapter 19 - Social policy and employment  
Montenegro has some level of preparation in this area. Some progress was made, in 
particular on work towards the legislative alignment of the labour law and on anti-
discrimination, as well as advancing the reform of the Employment Agency.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ continue to strengthen the Employment Agency so that it can efficiently play its role as 
a modern public employment service, and effectively implement the Youth Guarantee 
and future use of the European Social Fund (ESF); 
→ intensify reform efforts for improved and timely provision of active labour market 


===== PAGE 16 =====
 
15 
 
measures with an emphasis on their labour market relevance; 
→ adopt the Strategy and Law on social and child protection and start implementing the 
reform. 
Chapter 20 - Enterprise and industrial policy  
Montenegro achieved a good level of preparation in this area. Good progress was made, 
notably by implementing enterprise and industrial policy and completing preparations for 
alignment with the current EU policy framework.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were mostly implemented. In the 
coming year, Montenegro should: 
→ implement the new industrial policy, in cooperation with all relevant stakeholders;  
→ align with the EU Late Payments Directive;  
→ continue addressing various business barriers identified by the Competitiveness 
Council.  
Chapter 25 - Science and research  
Montenegro has a good level of preparation in this sector. Good progress was made, 
notably on continuing the implementation of the Smart Specialisation Strategy and 
strengthening academia-business cooperation and adoption of the strategy for scientific 
research. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should:  
→ adopt a new smart specialisation strategy and continue to implement it; 
→ further strengthen the national innovation ecosystem; 
→ adopt the new research and development strategy and adopt the law on scientific 
research activities. 
Chapter 26 - Education and culture  
Montenegro has a good level of preparation in this area. Some progress was made, notably 
on advancing preparations for the sectoral reform strategy and implementing the strategy 
on early and preschool education. The recommendation related to evaluation mechanisms 
for practical learning remains to be addressed. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ adopt a high-quality, comprehensive and costed education sector strategy with clear 
and realistic targets based on evidence; and a solid financial framework for its 
sustained implementation; 
→ put in place mechanisms to evaluate practical learning at VET and higher education 
levels and to ensure increased work-based learning with employers. 
→ ensure full implementation, funding and monitoring of the new Youth Strategy 2023-
2027. 
Chapter 29 - Customs union  
Montenegro is moderately prepared for the customs union. It made some progress, 
advancing preparations for its accession to the Common Transit Convention and amending 


===== PAGE 17 =====
 
16 
 
its legislative framework on intellectual property rights and cultural goods.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ finalise the legal and technical preparations for the country’s accession to the Common 
Transit Convention and for the implementation and operation of the New Computerised 
Transit System (NCTS – phase 5); 
→ adopt and implement new business strategy and IT strategy of Customs Administration; 
→ ensure sufficient staffing levels and funding to upgrade its IT systems, enabling 
interconnection and interoperability with the EU electronic customs environment. 
 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY  
Chapter 14 - Transport policy  
Montenegro is between moderate and a good level of preparation in this area. There was 
limited progress on key reforms, with the adoption of the new road safety strategy.   
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and r 
remain valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ adopt a new railway law to ensure that fully functional,  operationally independent and 
appropriately staffed   railway regulatory body and  railway safety authority are in place;  
→ lay down the strategic Intelligent Transport System framework for the rail and maritime 
networks; 
→ ensure full implementation, funding and monitoring of 2024-2030 road safety strategy. 
Chapter 15 - Energy  
Montenegro has reached a good level of preparation in this area. Limited progress was 
achieved, with drafting the National Energy and Climate Plan and implementing renewable 
energy projects. Montenegro is signiﬁcantly delayed on drafting and adoption of the 
National Energy and Climate Plan, alignment with the acquis on mandatory oil stocks and on 
alignment with the Electricity Integration Package. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
remain largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ finalise and start implementing the National Energy and Climate Plan, in line with the 
Energy Community energy and climate targets; 
→ adopt and implement the Law on energy, transposing the Electricity Integration Package 
and the Law on security of supply of oil products, also appointing the stockholding body 
for the mandatory oil reserves;  
→ accelerate alignment with the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive and  
deployment of energy efficiency along new targets, to align with the EU renovation wave 
policy.  
Chapter 21 - Trans-European networks  
Montenegro is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in this area. There was 
no progress on key reforms.  


===== PAGE 18 =====
 
17 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ review its transport development strategy and align it with the strategy for sustainable 
and smart mobility in the Western Balkans, confirming a policy shift towards rail, 
multimodality and reducing CO2 emissions and other environmental impacts; 
→ strengthen administrative capacity and develop institutional policies to hire and retain 
skilled staff to manage infrastructure projects in the areas of transport, 
telecommunications and energy; 
→ revise institutional policies to improve decision-making on infrastructure projects and 
increase the capacity to absorb funding. 
Chapter 27 - Environment and climate change  
Montenegro has some level of preparation in this area. Some progress was made in further 
aligning national legislation with the EU acquis, namely through the adoption of the Law on 
waste management, the Law on biocidal products, and, in the field of civil protection, by 
connecting fully to the EU’s Common Emergency Communication and Information System.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented , and remain  
valid, in particular on the priority reforms needed. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in 
particular:  
→ signiﬁcantly intensify work to achieve the closing benchmarks for Chapter 27, 
specifically on implementation and enforcement of legislation, including the adoption 
and implementation of sectoral strategies, particularly in the areas of waste 
management, air and water quality, nature protection, and climate change and ensure 
that there is there an institutional structure in place to deliver coordinated, strategic 
planning for climate and environmental investments; 
→ adopt implementing legislation necessary to implement the new Law on waste 
management and finalise and adopt the national waste management plan for the next 
5-year period, followed by the adoption of waste management plans at local level;  
→ implement commitments under the Energy Community’s Decarbonisation Roadmap in 
particular adopt and implement the National Energy and Climate Plan (NECP), and take 
steps for the alignment with the EU Emission Trading Scheme (ETS). 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION  
Chapter 11 - Agriculture and rural development 
Montenegro remains moderately prepared in this area. Good progress was achieved, mainly 
through  improved implementation of the Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance for Rural 
Development (IPARD II and III), drafting an implementation  plan for the establishment  of a  
Paying Agency and an integrated administrative and control system (IACS) extending the 
area included  in the land parcel identification system (LPIS). However, there were no 
developments regarding legislative alignment apart from the wine sector.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were largely implemented. In the 
coming year, Montenegro should in particular:  
→ ensure full absorption of the IPARD II funds by the end of 2024,  and intensify the 
implementation of the  IPARD III programme;  
→ further implement the action plan for aligning with the EU acquis on agriculture and rural 


===== PAGE 19 =====
 
18 
 
development including the setting up of the paying agency and adoption of related 
legislation; 
→ ensure further progress with the roll-out of the land parcel identiﬁcation system (LPIS) 
across the whole territory. 
Chapter 12 - Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy  
Montenegro remains moderately prepared. Some progress was achieved through further 
alignment of implementing legislation with the EU acquis, the adequate monitoring of 
zoonoses, zoonotic agents and their antimicrobial resistance (AMR), the prompt tackling of 
an outbreak of African swine fever and an increase of establishments fulfilling EU standards.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid.  In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular:   
→ ﬁnalise alignment of its legislation with the acquis on  oﬃcial controls and strengthen its 
administrative, inspection and infrastructure capacities to implement the system of 
oﬃcial controls;  
→ establish robust passive surveillance of rabies and independently continue with the 
aerial rabies vaccination as necessary. In addition, strengthen the surveillance 
programme for notiﬁable avian diseases; 
→ pursue the efforts to approximate national legislation with the EU animal welfare 
legislation until alignment is complete and strengthen administrative and inspection 
capacities for its implementation by engaging additional staff for food safety, veterinary 
and phytosanitary sectors. 
Chapter 13 - Fisheries and aquaculture 
Montenegro has some level of preparation in this area. Some progress was made through 
the adoption of the new 2024-2029 fisheries and aquaculture strategy and its action plan, 
the adoption of an agreement on subsidies and fisheries within the WTO framework, the 
adoption of the Law on market organisation in fisheries and aquaculture and the updating of 
legislation.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and  remain 
partially valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular:  
→ increase its administrative, control and inspection capacities;  
→ ﬁnalise and adopt pending legislation on structural measures and State aid in ﬁsheries 
and aquaculture,  on Marine ﬁsheries and Mariculture  and start work on implementing 
legislation. 
Chapter 22 - Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in this area. Some progress was made with work on 
updating the Chapter 22 Action Plan and preparations for IPA III operational programmes 
(Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance) and the related budget entrustments. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular 
→ advance implementation of the updated action plan for chapter 22. 
→ strengthen its administrative capacity in both designing and implementing policies 
relevant for the country’s economic and social cohesion and its regional 


===== PAGE 20 =====
 
19 
 
competitiveness,  including strengthened interinstitutional coordination and structured 
dialogue with social partners (employers groups and unions) and civil society, which 
should be involved in policy development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation. 
→ work on a solid pipeline of projects irrespective of the source of funding, along with a 
framework for strategic sectoral orientations and policies, while improving project 
preparation, procurement and implementation in line with EU and international 
standards. 
Chapter 33 - Financial and budgetary provisions  
Montenegro has some level of preparation in this area. Overall, limited progress was made. 
Progress took place mainly concerning the adoption of implementing legislation and 
guidelines on the procedure for planning the resources that Montenegro pays to the EU 
budget.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular:  
→ strengthen the administrative capacity of the Directorate for Coordination and 
Management of EU Own Resources and of all other institutions involved in the own-
resources system, notably by developing organisational and procedural links between 
these institutions; 
→ fully implement the improvements to the IT system of the Revenue and Customs 
Administration enabling a full audit trail and reporting on customs duties;  
→ adopt implementing legislation on collecting debts on movable and immovable property 
and procedures for writing off uncollectible customs debt and start their 
implementation.  
 
CLUSTER 6: EXTERNAL RELATIONS  
Chapter 30 - External relations 
Montenegro has a good level of preparation. Some progress was made in the field of 
regional cooperation and development policy and humanitarian aid.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ continue to actively participate in the implementation of measures under the Common 
Regional Market action plan for 2021-2024, implement actions under the new action 
plan for 2025-2028 and take the necessary steps to implement  Additional Protocol 7 to 
the CEFTA on dispute settlement; 
→ ensure proper implementation of the new Law on international development 
cooperation and international humanitarian assistance and set up a database on donor 
support projects. 
Chapter 31 - Foreign, security and defence policy 
Montenegro has a good level of preparation. Good progress was made as the country 
maintained its track record of full alignment with relevant statements by the High 
Representative on behalf of the EU and Council decisions on sanctions, including with the EU 
restrictive measures related to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and has provided assistance to 


===== PAGE 21 =====
 
20 
 
Ukraine. Montenegro continued to participate in EU crisis management missions and 
operations under the common security and defence policy.   
The recommendations from last year were implemented. In the coming year, Montenegro 
should, in particular:  
→  maintain its full alignment with the EU common foreign and security and strengthen its 
enforcement capacity regarding restrictive measures. 
→  take further efforts to close space for foreign interference and information 
manipulation, including disinformation, and take action towards building resilience 
against all forms of hybrid threats by adopting the strategy on countering hybrid threats 
and its related action plan.  
 
1.3. 
STATE OF PLAY OF THE ACCESSION NEGOTIATIONS  
CLUSTERS 
Chapters / areas  
Date chapter opened / closed with 
interim or closing benchmarks   
Fundamentals 
 
All chapters open 
23-Judiciary and fundamental rights  
24-Justice, freedom, security  
  5-Public procurement  
18-Statistics  
32-Financial control 
…Economic criteria 
…Functioning of democratic institutions  
…Public administration reform 
December 2013  
December 2013  
December 2013  
December 2014 
June 2014  
 
- 
- 
Internal market 
All chapters open 
 1-Free movement of goods   
 2-Freedom of movement for workers   
 3-Right of establishment and freedom 
to establish services  
 4-Free movement of capital 
 6-Company law  
 7-Intellectual property rights 
 8-Competition  
 9-Financial services  
28-Consumer and health protection 
June 2017  
December 2017  
December 2017  
… 
June 2014  
December 2013  
March 2014  
June 2020  
June 2015  
December 2014   
Competitiveness and 
inclusive growth 
 
 
All chapters open,  
ch.25  and 26 
provisionally closed 
10-Information society and media  
16-Taxation 
17-Economic and monetary policy 
19-Social policy and employment  
20-Enterprise and industrial policy  
25-Science and research 
  
26-Education and culture 
  
29-Customs union  
March 2014  
March 2015  
June 2018  
December 2016  
December 2013  
December 2012 (opened and closed - 
no closing benchmarks);  
April 2013  (opened and closed – no 
closing benchmarks) 
December 2014   
Green Agenda and 
sustainable 
connectivity 
All chapters open 
14- Transport policy 
15- Energy 
21-Trans-European Networks 
27-Environment and climate change  
December 2015  
December 2015  
June 2015  
December 2018  
Resources, 
agriculture and 
11-Agriculture and rural development  
12-Food safety, veterinary, phytosanitary 
December 2016  
 


===== PAGE 22 =====
 
21 
 
cohesion 
 
All chapters open  
 
services 
13- Fisheries and aquaculture 
22-Regional policy and coordination of  
      structural instruments  
33-Financial and budgetary provisions  
June 2016  
June 2016  
 
June 2017  
December 2014  
External relations 
Both chapters open, 
ch.30 provisionally 
closed  
30-External relations  
31- Foreign, security & defence policy  
March 2015 – June 2017 provisionally 
closed 
June 2014   
 
∗ ∗ ∗ 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 23 =====
 
22 
 
2. CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
2.1. FUNCTIONING OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION REFORM  
2.1.1 Democracy  
The functioning of democratic institutions is satisfactory. Since its formation at the end of 
October 2023, the government has been operating in a generally stable political 
environment, with a lower level of polarisation compared to recent years. However, the 
country and its institutions are fragile and vulnerable to political crisis and potential 
institutional blockages.  
Elections 
No nationwide elections took place. Early elections were held in the municipalities of Budva 
and Andrijevica on 26 May 2024 and 2 June 2024 respectively, due to serious 
dysfunctionalities in their governance. Further early elections took place in Gusinje on 15 
September, in Podgorica and Kotor on 29 September 2024 The election process in the 
municipality of Savnik, held in October 2022 and suspended in December 2022 due to 
irregularities, has not been completed to date. 
While the legal framework 
provides a basis for the 
democratic 
conduct 
of 
elections, 
it 
should 
be 
comprehensively revised to 
address a number of gaps 
and 
inconsistencies. 
Parliament 
set 
up 
a 
committee 
for 
a 
comprehensive 
electoral 
reform, with a mandate until 
31 December 2024, but no 
progress 
was 
made 
in 
following up on the pending 
OSCE/ODIHR recommendations and crucial issues concerning electoral legislative reform . 
Montenegro  should further strive to align its electoral processes to highest democratic 
standards, such as the ones highlighted in the Commission Recommendation(EU) 
2023/2829 of 12 December 2023. 
The inclusion of women in political life remains low and is undermined by insufficient state 
and public efforts to overcome gender stereotypes and the failure of most political parties to 
promote women’s participation.  
Parliament  
The parliament elected in June 2023 held its first session at the end of October 2023 and 
has been operating regularly overall. It assembled a clear majority to approve several key 
judicial appointments. In June 2024, it unanimously adopted twelve EU-related  in the areas 
of judiciary, anti-corruption, and media. However, during summer 2024 the Parliament took 
some hasty legislative initiatives failing to apply the necessary transparency. The PM’s 
question time took place irregularly and on some occasions was filibustered by the 
opposition. 
Following its endorsement of the United Nations General Assembly Resolution on the 
Srebrenica genocide in May 2024, the government faced criticism from some majority 
parties in Parliament, with one temporarily withdrawing its support. On 28 June, part of the 
22
4
4
1
81
22
35
25
27.16
23.5
11.43
4
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
100.00
0
20
40
60
80
100
Number of
MPs
Number of
Deputy Prime
Minsiters /
Ministers
Number of
party leaders
Mayors
Graph 1 : Montenegro - Women in political life
Women
Total
%
Source: Parliament, State Election Commission, Ministry of Interior


===== PAGE 24 =====
 
23 
 
ruling majority supported a resolution on the ‘genocide in the system of concentration camps 
Jasenovac, Dachau and Mauthausen’ which was considered politically instrumental by the 
opposition and was perceived as antagonising by Croatia.  
As part of their supervisory activities, the parliamentary committees considered numerous 
reports that independent bodies submitted to Parliament in accordance with the law. 
However, there is no uniform practice or approach to the conduct of parliamentary hearings. 
During 2024, the ruling majority repeatedly voted against control hearings requested by the 
opposition. 
In 2023, the public submitted 52 requests for free access to information to Parliament, which 
were all responded to. Of 80 citizen petitions Parliament received by 31 December 2023, 58 
were admissible and were all dealt with. Of 40 e-petitions, 22 did not get the required amount 
of signatures, 14 were not within the jurisdiction of Parliament, one resulted in a consultative 
hearing before the relevant committee, two are pending to be discussed at the relevant 
committee. One e-petition ended up in the form of a Draft Resolution submitted to the 
Parliament of Montenegro.  No reports of violations of the Code of Ethics were submitted to 
the Committee on Human Rights and Freedoms.  
In December 2023, Parliament formed a cross-party Women’s MP Group.  
EU integration  
In December 2023, Montenegro established a new negotiation structure and appointed a 
Chief Negotiator as General Director in the Ministry of European Affairs reporting to the 
Minister. As part of the structure, lead negotiations for the clusters have been appointed and 
working groups in charge of each negotiating chapter were formed in February 2024. 
However, they are not meeting on a regular basis. The Ministry of European Affairs’ overall 
coordination role is somewhat undermined by a lack of resources and limited influence over 
other ministries and structures. 
Overall, the government greatly accelerated preparations on EU accession and worked 
effectively, in particular on meeting the requirements stemming from the interim 
benchmarks of chapters 23 and 24. This culminated in the adoption of a legislative package 
of 12 laws, as well as a package of three strategies, on which the European Commission and 
where relevant the Council of Europe or the Venice Commission had been consulted.  
On 11 April 2024, the government adopted Montenegro's Programme of Accession to the 
European Union for 2024-2027. On 7 March  and 2 August 2024, Montenegro adopted 
quarterly reports  on its activities in the EU accession process. On 26 June 2024, the 16th 
meeting of the Accession Conference with Montenegro at ministerial level confirmed that, 
overall, Montenegro met the interim benchmarks for Chapters 23 and 24 and adopted the 
closing benchmarks for these chapters.  
Governance  
Following the June 2023 early parliamentary elections, the new government was established 
on 30 October 2023. In March 2024, the Prime Minister and Minister of the Interior failed to 
agree on a candidate for the acting Police Director, causing political tensions. In June, the 
PM initiated proceedings to dismiss the Minister of Justice, due to intra-party political 
disagreements. The coalition agreement from October 2023 envisaged a government re-
shuffle within a year, which took place on 23 July 2024. The new government comprises 7 
Deputy Prime Ministers and 24 ministers. 
As for local governance, decentralisation in Montenegro is limited and primarily confined to 
utility services, water supply and public space maintenance. Even though local governments 
have their own remits on paper, in practice they often must secure approval from central 
authorities. Local governments have restricted financial autonomy and are often not 


===== PAGE 25 =====
 
24 
 
consulted on draft laws that directly impact them. In December 2023, the Law on local self-
government financing was amended, entailing reallocation of funds among the 
municipalities and aimed at increasing the income of the municipalities in the north.  
Civil society 
The overall legal and institutional framework on freedom of expression, association and 
assembly is in place, but some important pieces of legislation need reinforcing. The 
adoption of amendments to the Law on access to information has been pending for years. 
The tax law provides some incentives for philanthropy, but its notion of ‘public interest’ is 
limited, therefore restricting tax incentives for supporting CSOs. Montenegro has a Law on 
voluntary work, which sets out the rights and obligations of volunteers. However, a broader 
legal framework is needed. 
Civil society’s role in policy-making is formalised, yet at times purely symbolic,  so the 
government’s practical implementation of this principle needs to be further reinforced. The 
2022-2026 strategy for cooperation between state administration bodies and  NGOs is being 
implemented, its practical application remains inadequate both in terms of public funding as 
well as its involvement in public consultations. The Council for Cooperation between the 
Government and NGOs has not resumed work since October 2021.  
The relaunching of a dialogue between the government and civil society should be 
addressed as a matter of priority. A structure to monitor the strategy and to discuss the 
future Law on NGOs is yet not in place. In 2023, some ministries appointed CSO 
representatives to working groups for draft laws and national strategies, in compliance with 
the Law on public administration. However, not all ministries conducted public consultations 
on draft laws.  
The public funding of NGOs is regulated by a set of rules to ensure transparency, including 
the obligation of ministries to conduct consultations with NGOs on annual funding priorities, 
to publish open calls and to award grants through a selection process involving external 
evaluators.  
Despite the obligation prescribed by the Law on NGOs, not all ministries launched calls for 
proposals to finance NGO projects. Montenegro needs to strengthen ministries’ capacity for 
strategic planning, monitoring and evaluation of support provided to CSOs to ensure public 
funding is awarded in a transparent and objective manner. 
2.1.2. Public administration reform  
Strategic framework for public administration reform  
The strategic framework for public administration is in place. The quality and effectiveness 
of public administration reform (PAR) strategy still needs to be improved. The 
implementation rate of the PAR Strategy for 2022-2026 was low. Political instability and 
cyberattacks were reported as the main reasons for this. Political support for PAR was 
ensured through the PAR Council, chaired by the Prime Minister, although at administrative 
level coordination is lacking. Dialogue with the non-governmental stakeholders on the PAR 
agenda is underdeveloped, and Montenegro does not have a central online platform that 
would allow public and non-governmental stakeholders to regularly monitor progress 
achieved.   
Policy development and coordination  
The policy development and coordination aspects still need to be developed. The legal 
framework is in place. In April 2024, the government adopted its annual work programme for 
2024 and its mid-term work programme (2024-2027). Coordination between governmental 
bodies could be improved. Montenegro’s programme for accession does not include 


===== PAGE 26 =====
 
25 
 
information on costing. There is no central, publicly accessible depository of government 
planning documents or reports.   
Evidence-based policymaking is only partially implemented. The government report from 
August 2023 indicates that ministries do not regularly conduct public consultations, and 
wide use is made of exemptions. Moreover, the state administration falls short of its 
obligation to publish an annual list of laws and strategies scheduled for public consultation, 
and the e-participation portal is not used by citizens and stakeholders. The Ministry of 
Finance had an active role in promoting regulatory impact assessments (RIA) and it made 
the reports available on its website. However, the quality of legal drafts proposed by 
Members of Parliament is low, without any RIA or public consultations and almost 
non-existent quality control. The capacity of line ministries to integrate evaluations into the 
policymaking cycle is underdeveloped. 
Public ﬁnancial management  
Public ﬁnancial management is broadly in place but needs to be improved. The Fiscal 
Council, established by law, is not yet functional, as Parliament has yet to appoint its 
members. Fiscal targets (public debt) do not comply with ﬁscal rules. In February 2024 the 
government published an oﬃcial list of 50 state-owned enterprises (SOE) at central level, 
with basic data about their ﬁnancial performance. There has been no debt management 
strategy in place since 2020.   
The government made efforts to improve the management of the capital budget. In January 
2024, it set up its ﬁrst Public Investments Council to improve planning and implementation 
of public infrastructure projects. And in March 2024 it adopted a decision to improve 
procedures and deﬁne conditions for preparing capital budget projects. However, no 
independent appraisal of large capital investment projects is in place.  
Due to the late formation of the government after the elections, the government breached 
the legal deadline for delivering the budget proposal for 2024 to Parliament. The draft 
mid-term government agenda published in February 2024 has no clear links to the annual 
programme budget framework. Reporting on the accomplishment of non-ﬁnancial targets 
from the programme budget framework is yet to be established. The credibility of medium-
term revenue and expenditure forecasts remains low. Montenegro continued to make 
progress on introducing gender-responsive budgeting but it is not embedded in the legal 
framework and the efforts have yet to yield tangible results.  Accounting reforms have been 
delayed. Commitment control is not fully operational due to limitations in the accounting 
system and there are no accounting standards in place.   
The Open Budget Survey published in May 2024 gives Montenegro a transparency score of 
48 (out of 100), indicating insuﬃcient budget transparency. Signiﬁcant issues remain in the 
availability and content of the key budget documents. The amount of information in the 
annual budget seems excessive and poses diﬃculties for eﬃcient scrutiny in Parliament.  
Public service and human resources management  
The management of public service and human resources still needs to be improved. The 
legal framework only partially ensures that the civil service is professional, de-politicised 
and merit-based. The administration does not have a complete overview of all public 
employees under different types of public employment contracts, and the salary system 
continues to lack clarity and transparency. As concerns gender parity in the public 
administration, 315 women were employed in 2023 which is 19.8% fewer than in 2022, while 
in the same year 424 men were employed, an increase of 73% compared to 2022.   
Modern human resources management capacity within the Human Resource Management 
Authority (HRMA) and public administration bodies remains limited, with no signiﬁcant 


===== PAGE 27 =====
 
26 
 
progress on the human resources management information system. As concerns 
recruitment, testing is insuﬃciently standardised and the skills framework only exists for 
senior management staff. The selection processes for managerial positions are subject to 
political inﬂuence, and in non-managerial recruitment the heads of authorities have ample 
discretion to appoint candidates who are not the best ranked. The legal framework also 
leaves wide discretion for easily triggered dismissals without objective grounds.   
Human resources plans are not aligned with the budget process, and the government has 
adopted only a partial personnel plan for 2024. HRMA continues to perform well as the 
central coordinating body for civil service training. There was no improvement in deﬁning job 
descriptions and requirements, while the high concentration of performance appraisal in the 
highest rating categories undermines the usefulness of the system for rewarding good 
performance.  
Although rightsizing (optimising) public administration is one of the main objectives of the 
PAR strategy, in November 2023 there was a total staff increase of 3.9% at the central level 
and 7% at local level as compared to 2 years earlier.  
Accountability of administration  
The accountability of administration still needs to be improved. The legislative framework is 
in place, but the Law on state administration does not cover all administrative bodies. 
Internal management of the ministries remains centralised in the hands of minister. Since 
the establishment of the new government in October 2023, major reorganisation of some 
state administration bodies took place without prior analysis, leading to signiﬁcant staff 
turnover.  
Adoption of amendments to the Law on access to information has been pending for years.  
The legal basis is in place to ensure the citizens’ right to good administration in 
administrative procedures, but cases of administrative disputes are not treated in a 
reasonable time. The Administrative Court has a very large number of administrative 
disputes from the area of access to information, which results in a signiﬁcant backlog.  
As regards the strategic framework for anti-corruption and integrity, the existing legislation 
on asset declarations, whistleblowers and lobbying does not provide effective measures for 
eliminating irregularities in public administration.  
Service delivery to people and businesses 
This still needs to be improved. The process of modernising public service delivery is slow. 
The Law on administrative procedures was not consistently implemented, notably 
concerning the ‘once only’ principle and electronic communication. Services in general 
remain bureaucratic and are not user-friendly. Currently there is no user-friendly central 
public service catalogue or standards for public service. Moreover, there is no adequate 
institutional set-up or capacity for steering administrative simpliﬁcation across the public 
administration.   
There was some progress in digital governance, particularly regarding the interoperability 
framework and the electronic exchange of data among various government bodies. Also, the 
e-Payment portal became fully operational in 2023, allowing citizens to electronically pay 
administrative fees. Regarding cross-border interoperability, Montenegro is  aligning with the 
European Interoperability Framework (EIF), but in practice interoperability for cross-border 
services needs to be substantively increased. 
The government should work towards full deployment of transactional public electronic 
services under the e-government platform and interoperability of registers through the 
Reform Agenda. At the end of 2023, the number of e-government services was 389, down 


===== PAGE 28 =====
 
27 
 
from 403, due to internal reorganisation and work on launching the new eGovernment Portal, 
expected by the end of 2024. A small number of new services came into operation, including 
applications for student loans and scholarships. Since the 2022 cyber-attack, the Open Data 
Portal has been operating with limited functionality and the government has been working 
on a new solution, with EU assistance.   
2.2.1 Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights 
The EU’s founding values include the rule of law and respect for human rights. An effective 
(independent, high-quality and efficient) judicial system and an effective fight against 
corruption are of paramount importance, as is respect of fundamental rights, in law and in 
practice. 
Functioning of the judiciary  
Strategic documents 
A new strategic framework for the reform of the justice system is now in place.  
A new Judicial Reform Strategy 2024-2027 and its action plan were adopted in May 2024 in 
line with European standards, and the Government established a new council for monitoring 
its implementation, including representatives of the main stakeholders in the executive, 
judiciary and state prosecution service.   
Overall, the planning, monitoring and timely implementation of the strategic framework 
remains to be improved, and a holistic approach should be followed, involving all concerned 
stakeholders. 
Management bodies 
The management bodies are in place, but further efforts are needed to improve their 
performance and restore public trust in the judicial system. 
In June 2024, Montenegro adopted amendments to the Law on Judicial Council and Judges 
and the Law on the State Prosecution Service, further aligning them with the EU acquis and 
EU standards.  
The main bodies managing the judicial system and the careers of judges and prosecutors 
are the Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils. Their composition and appointment procedures 
are broadly in line with European standards. The role of the Minister of Justice as ex officio 
member of the Judicial Council remains to be further limited and a long-term legal solution 
found, to align with the European standards in this regard, which specify that in such cases 
the Minister shall not vote on decisions on transfer and disciplinary proceedings for judges, 
as a minimum safeguard. The Council of Europe Group of States against Corruption 
(GRECO) recommends abolishing the ex-officio membership altogether.  
Pending the legislative and constitutional changes needed to bring the constitution into line 
with these recommendations, in May 2024 the Minister of Justice issued a decision recusing 
himself from participating in the work of the Judicial Council, which was supported by the 
Government as the Prime Minister informed the Commission. He did not participate in the 
work of the Judicial Council since February 2024. In August, a new Minister of Justice was 
appointed.  
Another relevant standard on the composition of the Judicial Council is that judges chosen 
by their peers must make up at least half of its members and ex-officio judge members do 
not count in this regard. The present composition of the Council in Montenegro, it appears 
that judges selected by their peers are in a minority. This situation will also need to be 
addressed through legal amendments.  
In addition, the Venice Commission has noted the need to find a more sustainable solution 


===== PAGE 29 =====
 
28 
 
to the regulation of the composition of the Prosecutorial Council and the method of election 
of its members, which could require adding a constitutional provision.  
Both Councils have yet to consolidate their regular work and practices, and to improve their 
strategic approach to addressing deficiencies in the operation of the courts and prosecution 
offices. The working premises and conditions of both Councils are inadequate. The 
administrative capacity of both Council secretariats needs to be further strengthened. 
Overall, transparency is ensured, as the sessions of both Councils are public.  
Independence and impartiality 
The legal framework guaranteeing judicial independence and impartiality is in place. The 
June 2024 substantial amendments to the Law on Judicial Council and Judges and to the 
Law on State Prosecution Service ensured further alignment with the EU acquis and 
European standards regarding the independence, impartiality, accountability and integrity of 
the judiciary.  
Therefore, Montenegro 
must focus its efforts in 
ensuring 
full 
and 
effective 
implementation of the 
legal 
framework 
to 
address 
existing 
challenges, 
and 
continue its alignment 
to further improve it by 
addressing 
the 
remaining 
recommendations from 
the 
European 
Commission, the Venice 
Commission and the 
Council of Europe Group of States against Corruption (GRECO), as, overall, the judiciary and 
the prosecution remain perceived as vulnerable to political interference, which may 
contribute to undermining the public trust in the judiciary.  
After years of deadlock, in November, December 2023 and January 2024 Parliament 
appointed, by qualified majority, a new permanent Supreme State Prosecutor, three lay 
members of the Judicial Council and one judge of the Constitutional Court, through a 
transparent and merit-based selection procedure. However, the appointment of a permanent 
President of the Supreme Court has failed eight consecutive times and is still pending. A 
new appointment procedure is currently ongoing.   
The random allocation of cases is provided for by the Law on courts and implemented 
automatically through the judicial information system. However, limitations remain in very 
small courts, where the system is not functional due to the lack of judges. The system of 
random allocation of cases is yet to be introduced in the misdemeanour courts. 
Accountability 
The legal framework ensuring the accountability of the judiciary is largely in place and was 
further improved through the June 2024 legal amendments. Its full and effective 
enforcement must be ensured to improve the accountability of the judiciary in practice. The 
promotion and enforcement of ethics and standards of professional behaviour of judges 
and prosecutors, and the implementation of disciplinary rules and ethics for judges and 
prosecutors remain challenging. There is an initial track record of reported and established 
n/a
0
n/a
16
n/a
n/a
n/a
0
n/a
0
n/a
18
n/a
0
n/a
1
0
5
10
15
20
2022
2023
2022
2023
Judicial Council of Montenegro
Prosecutorial council of Montenegro
Graph 2: Montenegro - Requests for protection from undue 
influence
Requests received
Outcome of decisions Validation
Outcome of decisions Rejection
Outcome of decisions Pending
Source: Ministry of Justice
n/a: not available


===== PAGE 30 =====
 
29 
 
violations of the Codes of Ethics and of the 
enforcement of disciplinary accountability 
of judges and prosecutors. However, the 
Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils must 
improve their practice and proactiveness, 
since 
disciplinary 
proceedings, 
when 
substantiated, tend to result in relatively 
minor sanctions and dismissals remain 
rare. The Ethical Commission of the Judicial 
Council did not perform its duties between 
August 2022 and March 2024, and there are 
no 
disciplinary 
violations 
by 
judges 
established in 2023.  
In December 2023, the Agency for the Prevention of Corruption adopted a step-by-step 
methodology for the in-depth verification of assets and income declarations for judges and 
prosecutors based on European best practice, which introduces a risk-based approach for 
initiating cases ex-officio, thus improving the accuracy, quality, efficiency, and impartiality of 
the Agency’s work in this area. However, there have been no convictions of judges and 
prosecutors based on criminal proceedings arising from checks of asset declarations. The 
verification of asset declarations can be improved by providing for substantive checks by 
the Agency, as well as the effective disciplinary action by the two Councils for failure to 
submit assets and income declarations to the Agency.  
There 
was 
no 
progress 
in 
implementing 
ethical 
codes 
for 
notaries, 
public 
bailiffs, and court 
interpreters, 
and 
there is no code of 
ethics for lawyers. 
The 
Ministry 
of 
Justice established 
a special Directorate 
for 
judicial 
supervision 
and 
increased 
the 
number of officials 
(General Director and eight judicial inspectors). The positions of three judicial inspectors 
remain vacant. In 2023, judicial inspectors performed supervision on the work of 21 courts, 
16 state prosecution offices, 44 notaries and 21 public bailiffs’ offices.  
Quality of justice  
The quality of justice needs to be improved. The Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils 
regularly adopt plans for filling vacant judicial and prosecutorial positions through single 
nationwide competitions. However, a significant portion of vacancies exists in both the 
judiciary and prosecution. Specifically, 17.6% of judicial positions and 39.7% of prosecutorial 
positions need to be filled. Only a small number of candidates applied for the competition 
for trainees in courts published in January 2024.  
Rules on the evaluation of judges and prosecutors were revised, introducing a system of 
evaluation for judges of the Supreme Court for the first time.  
3
11
2
16
0
0
0
5
10
15
20
Judges
Prosecutors
Graph 3: Montenegro- Disciplinary 
procedures - 2023
Initiated
Completed
Sanctions pronounced
Source: CEPEJ


===== PAGE 31 =====
 
30 
 
While judges and prosecutors are occasionally evaluated (84 in 2023), both Councils still do 
not carry out systematic regular professional appraisals.  
Furthermore, the quality of appraisals needs to improve with a detailed assessment of 
individual performance and capacity, including quality and quantity of the completed tasks. 
The effectiveness of the judiciary is hampered by the lack of strategic investment in human 
resources, ICT and infrastructure. The 2023 annual budget for the judiciary was EUR 30.6 
million, which stakeholders considered insufficient. 
Furthermore, at all levels of the judiciary, the 
allocated working spaces and working conditions 
including equipment, are considered inadequate.  
The functioning of the Judicial Training Centre 
continues to improve, and its 2023 budget was in 
accordance with the amount prescribed by law.  
The positive trend in alternative dispute resolution 
continued and the system continued to expand.  
In 2023, Montenegro spent EUR 42.2 million on the 
implemented judicial system budget (EUR 66.5 per 
inhabitant, significantly above Western Balkans 
average of EUR 45.2 per inhabitant).  
Efficiency 
The efficiency of justice needs to be significantly improved.  
The backlog of cases pending before courts is significant. At the end of 2023, the number of 
cases older than 3 years increased by 20%. The average disposition time in 2023 increased 
to 309 days (2022: 238 days). It is of particular concern that the disposition time of 
Administrative Court cases further increased to 1 411 days (2022: 1 158).  
The clearance rate in 2023 remained at 82.49%.  
The judicial system suffers from inadequate human resources and courtrooms. In May 
2024, the Ministry of Justice adopted a new 2024-2027 Plan for the Rationalisation of the 
Judicial Network. Montenegro must complete the rationalisation of the judicial network 
based on the existing analyses and the adopted plan. More efforts are needed to digitalise 
justice system, in particular in relation to communication with courts. A new Directorate for 
judicial infrastructure was formed within the Ministry of Justice. As regards the digitalisation 
of the judicial system, in September 2023 the Secretariat of the Judicial Council adopted 
alternative solutions to improve the existing Judicial Informative System (PRIS). Once the 
new Strategy for the digitalisation of the judiciary is adopted, these measures will be applied, 
to enable advanced reporting through IT tools. 
234
3125
1124
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Settlement
agreements
Finalised
court-related
mediations
Mediators
Mediation cases
Graph 5: Montenegro - Alternative 
dispute resolution - 2023
Source: CEPEJ


===== PAGE 32 =====
 
31 
 
   
 
Domestic handling of war crimes 
Montenegro’s track record in the domestic handling of war crimes must continue improving, 
by applying a proactive approach to effectively investigate, prosecute, try, and punish war 
crimes in line with international law and standards, including full cooperation with the 
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and to ensure access to justice 
and reparations for victims. 
In June 2024, the Supreme State Prosecution Office adopted a new War Crimes 
Investigation Strategy for 2024-2027. To ensure effective implementation, Montenegro 
needs to improve its proactive investigation and prosecution of war crimes, in line with 
international humanitarian law.  
In May 2024, the Criminal Procedure Code (CPC) was amended to address the legal and 
practical obstacles to effectively investigating, prosecuting, trying and punishing war crimes, 
in line with the recommendations of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal 
Tribunals (IRMCT).  
The Special State Prosecutor's Office (SSPO) is currently investigating 12 cases. In June 
2024, SSPO launched an investigation against the former Chief Special Prosecutor for 
alleged war crimes against civilians during the 1990s war in Croatia. In 2023, 10 requests for 
legal assistance were received (five from Bosnia and Herzegovina, three from Serbia, one 
from Kosovo∗, and one from Croatia). Responses were provided to eight requests, while the 
process is ongoing in two cases.  
Six requests for international legal assistance were sent (two to Serbia, two to Bosnia and 
Herzegovina and two to Croatia). The SSPO made progress on the proactive investigation 
and prosecution of war crimes. Cooperation with the IRMCT has intensified, resulting in the 
transmission of material from the IRMCT Office, indicating the involvement of Montenegrin 
citizens in wartime events in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Based on this material, in December 
2023, the SSPO in cooperation with the competent authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina 
issued an order for investigation against one individual for the crimes against humanity as 
per the Criminal Code. In June 2024, following the investigation, the SSPO issued an 
 
∗ This designation is without prejudice to positions on status and is line with UNSCR 1244/1999 and the ICJ 
Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence. 
81
83
72
89
95
94
67
85
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1st instance
2nd
instance
1st instance
2nd
instance
Criminal cases
Non-criminal cases*
Graph 6.1: Montenegro - Efficiency of 
courts (%) 
Clearance rate in 2022 %
Clearance rate in 2023 %
* Civil and commercial cases, administrative
cases, non-litigous cases, other cases
Source:CEPEJ
313
110
492
132
305
118
662
201
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
1st instance
2nd
instance
1st instance
2nd
instance
Criminal cases
Non-criminal cases*
Graph 6.2: Montenegro - Efficiency of 
courts (days) 
Disposition time 2022 (days)
Disposition time 2023 (days)
* Civil and commercial cases, administrative
cases, non-litigous cases, other cases
Source:CEPEJ


===== PAGE 33 =====
 
32 
 
indictment in this case. 
Montenegro participates in the regional Missing Persons Group and is implementing the 
framework plan signed in 2018. There is cooperation with neighbouring countries under 
bilateral cooperation protocols. The Commission on Missing Persons of Montenegro has 
compiled a list of missing persons that includes 51 active cases of Montenegrin citizens or 
people whose families reside in Montenegro. 
Fight against corruption  
Track record 
 
The track record on fighting corruption remained stable. The track record regarding 
investigations and prosecutions in cases of high-level corruption remained stable and needs 
to be further consolidated.  
The track record on preventing corruption improved in quantitative terms. In 2023, the 
Agency for the Prevention of Corruption (ACA) received the highest number of income and 
assets declarations compared to previous years, an increase of 11.5%. The growth is due to 
an increased number of newly appointed public officials, as well as a higher number of 
declarations submitted on termination of office.  
On incompatibility of functions and conflict of interest, the ACA issued in 2023 the highest 
number of opinions in a year since it was established – 227. The impact of controls on 
funding of political parties and electoral campaigns remains limited, due to the unclear 
provisions in the legislation, namely regarding the exemption of some categories of political 
subjects from the ACA’s scrutiny.  
As regards whistleblower’s reports, in 2023 the ACA received the highest number of cases 
since its establishment (190), of which 45% were submitted anonymously. In the same 
period, it forwarded 17 cases to the competent prosecutor's offices and 21 reports to other 
competent institutions. Two of these resulted in irregularities being found. The ACA initiated 
its highest ever number of misdemeanour proceedings with the misdemeanour courts for 
violations of anti-corruption laws (a 29.7% increase over 2022). In 2023, of the total number 
of whistleblower reports, 4.8% related to the private sector. 
The ACA developed a pre-appointment integrity checklist, to be applied to the Agency’s 
future employees, thus partly fulfilling one recommendation in the 5th GRECO evaluation 
round. Following the election of the new Council in August 2024, a Code of Ethics and new 
Rules of Procedure for ACA’s employees were adopted.  
Further work is needed to effectively address the 2021 EU peer review recommendations on 
the ACA’s mandate and functioning, including in dealing with conflicts of interest. 


===== PAGE 34 =====
 
33 
 
Institutional framework 
The institutional framework on preventing corruption is in place but needs to be 
strengthened, both as regards prevention and law enforcement capacities. As regard 
prevention, the key institution for promoting integrity and preventing corruption, through 
investigations related to asset declarations and verifications, is the ACA. In performing its 
activities, the ACA cooperates with several public bodies, including the prosecution services 
and the State Audit Institution (SAI).  
While overall the ACA’s results further improved in quantitative terms, its working methods 
and governance have been criticised, regarding a formalistic approach that impedes the 
effectiveness of its work. Since July 2023 the ACA worked in an incomplete institutional set 
up, due to the one-year vacancy of the Agency’s Council, which ended with the election of a 
new Council by the Parliament on 31 July 2024. In April 2024, the Agency’s Director was 
arrested for alleged abuse of office and damaging the state budget by over EUR 100 000. An 
investigation led by the SSPO is ongoing. In the meantime, as of 15 August  2024, the new 
ACA’s Council dismissed the former Agency’s Director and appointed as Acting Director a 
former head of ACA’s section for implementation of control measures in financing of 
political entities and election campaigns. The appointment of a full-term director will be 
done through a public call. The ACA’s independence, impartiality and accountability need to 
continue strengthening. 
In 2023, the SAI performed audit reports on both financial and regularity audits from 2022 
for 10 political entities and submitted them to Parliament in line with the Protocol on 
cooperation between the SAI and Parliament. 
As regard tackling corruption, the Special State Prosecution Office (SSPO) leads 
prosecutions in cases of high-level corruption. The Chief Special State Prosecutor also leads 
the Special Police Department (SPU). As in previous years, the SSPO’s human resources 
remain insufficient to cope with its workload. Also worrying is the shortage of police officers 
assigned to the SPU: currently only 30 out of 50 positions are filled.  
The office conditions are well below the minimum required European standards. This 
prevents SSPO and SPU from performing their duties appropriately, efficiently and 
independently. The High Court of Podgorica, whose remit covers organised crime, 
corruption, terrorism and war crimes, is understaffed. 
Strategic documents 
A new upgraded strategic framework for preventing and fighting corruption is now in place. 
In February 2024, the government established a new National Council for the Fight against 
Corruption, headed by the Deputy Prime Minister for the Political System, Justice and Anti-
Corruption. In May 2024, Montenegro adopted a new 2024-2028 anticorruption strategy and 
its action plan, aiming to align with European and international standards, by addressing 
prevention and repression of corruption, as well as international cooperation. The National 
Council will monitor its implementation, and ensure an integrated approach to the prevention 
and fight against corruption, where different entities should work in coordination.  
Legal framework 
The legal framework on the prevention and fight against corruption is largely in place. The 
prosecution service and courts must substantially improve the effective enforcement of 
criminal legislation, including preventive measures.  
In this regard, good progress was achieved with the adoption in June 2024 of a new Law on 
prevention of corruption with the aim to align it with European standards. It includes new 
provisions to improve the protection of whistleblowers, pending the adoption of a specific 


===== PAGE 35 =====
 
34 
 
law. In addition, amendments to the Criminal Code and the Law on games of chance, and a 
new Law on prevention of money laundering and financing of terrorism, were adopted. 
Montenegro adopted in May a new Law on lobbying in line with the EU acquis and European 
standards. It must now be complemented by the timely adoption of nine pieces of 
implementing legislation, drafted in line with EU and Council of Europe experts’ 
recommendations.  
In May 2024, Montenegro adopted amendments to the Law on seizure and confiscation of 
material benefit derived from criminal activity to address existing loopholes in the legal 
framework and practice on assets confiscation. The changes aim to address relevant EU 
acquis and European standards. While seizure and confiscation of illicit assets is adequately 
prioritised, financial investigations should also always trace the financial flows behind 
criminal activities. 
There is scope to improve the legal framework by further aligning it with existing EU acquis, 
international standards, and Venice Commission recommendations. Montenegro has yet to 
address several recommendations made by the EU peer review missions conducted in 2021 
and 2022, and the GRECO evaluation reports, including the fourth and fifth evaluation 
rounds. In 2023, the ACA issued 13 opinions for improving the legal framework related to 
corruption. Likewise, several of the Venice Commission and European Commission’s 
recommendations remain to be addressed. 
The Law on financing of political entities and election campaign (LFPEEC) has not yet been 
amended to bring it fully in line with European standards, notably through complying with 
GRECO and ODIHR recommendations to substantially increase transparency, control of the 
spending of political parties and prevent abuse of state resources, including dissuasive 
sanctions. Montenegro has to ensure that it treats the LFPEEC separately from the 
comprehensive electoral reform legislative package, in view of accelerating the work to 
amend the Law by the end of 2024. 
Fundamental rights  
General framework 
The general framework for fundamental rights is satisfactory. 
International human rights instruments  
Montenegro has yet to ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of 
All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families, the 2014 Protocol to the ILO 1930 
Forced Labour Convention, and the 2019 Framework Convention on Tourism Ethics of the 
UN World Tourism Organization.  
Montenegro 
needs 
to 
improve 
its 
mechanisms for reporting to the UN human 
rights mechanisms and following up on 
their 
recommendations, 
as 
highlighted 
during the universal periodic review in 2018.  
European Court of Human Rights  
Montenegro continues to ensure good 
cooperation with the European Court of 
Human Rights (ECtHR). During the reporting 
period, the Court found breaches of 
European Convention on Human Rights in 
nine cases, all related to the right to a fair 
trial 
and 
the 
protection 
of 
property. 
292
0
0
89
144
9
9
84
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
New
allocated
applications
Judgments
Breaches
Pending
applications
Graph 8: Montenegro - ECtHR judgments 
16.06.2022 - 15.06.2023
16.06.2023 - 01.09.2024
Source: ECtHR


===== PAGE 36 =====
 
35 
 
Currently, there are three cases under enhanced supervision by the Committee of Ministers 
relating to non-enforcement of domestic decisions against socially/State-owned companies 
(no cases last year). Montenegro needs to find a solution to the systemic problems in 
relation to these cases and to ensure systematic enforcement of ECtHR judgements.  
Promotion and enforcement of human rights  
There are shortcomings regarding access to justice and enforcement of rights in 
administrative and judicial proceedings, in particular for vulnerable groups. By 31 July 2024, 
the backlog of cases pending before the Constitutional Court stood at 2 440, of which 2 107 
are related to the protection of human rights. The duration of proceedings before the 
Constitutional Court needs to be reduced to comply with the ECtHR case law on the 
effectiveness of the constitutional complaint as a domestic legal remedy.  
Although the revision of the criminal legislation (Criminal Code and Procedural Criminal 
Code) is ongoing, further efforts are needed to align it with the EU acquis, and European and 
international standards on victims’ rights and procedural safeguards.  
The Ministry of Human 
and 
Minority 
Rights 
(MHMR) was reinforced, 
with staff increases and 
a 
reorganisation. 
Montenegro has yet to 
adopt a comprehensive 
monitoring 
and 
data 
collection 
system 
to 
assess 
the 
level 
of 
implementation 
of 
human rights legislation, 
policies, and strategies.  
The 
regulatory 
and 
institutional 
framework 
of the Ombudsperson’s 
Office is not fully aligned 
with the Paris principles. 
The 
decisions 
and 
recommendations of the 
Office are non-mandatory, and Montenegro needs to improve their systematic follow-up 
across all public institutions. The 2024 budget for the Office increased by 1% compared with 
the 2023 budget and is adequate and sustainable. The Office’s staff is satisfactory (35 in 
2023). The Ombudsperson’s office also functions as Equality Body. 
Prevention of torture and ill treatment 
Montenegro made limited progress in addressing the recommendations of the European 
Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment (CPT) and 
the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT). The December 2023 amendments to the Criminal 
Code removed the statute of limitations regarding the crime of torture but did not abolish it 
concerning the extortion of testimony and ill treatment. The amendments increased the 
penalties for torture, but the definition of torture is not aligned with CAT’s recommendation. 
There are systemic shortcomings and delays in investigating and prosecuting cases of 
alleged violence by law-enforcement officers, as well as cases of violence in prisons.  
Main themes: children's rights, youth and social protection; economic, social and cultural rights 
1109
1107
979
958
658
455
19.3
38
1
10
100
1000
10000
2022
2023
Ombudsperson*
Graph 9: Montenegro - Promotion and enforcement of 
human rights
Complaints
Decisions
Recommendations to the authorities
Implementation of the recommendationsby the authorities (% of the total)
Source: Ombudsperson's Office Annual Report 2022 and 2023
*The ombudsperson also acts as equality


===== PAGE 37 =====
 
36 
 
In 
2023, 
the 
Ombudsperson’s 
Office 
received 
57 
complaints about the 
conduct of the police, 
with 
the 
majority 
concerning allegations 
of potential inhumane 
or 
degrading 
treatment. In February 
2024, the Cetinje Basic 
Prosecutor’s 
Office 
suspended 
the 
investigation 
against 
police 
officers 
suspected 
of 
tampering with reports on the use of tear gas during the September 2021 protests against 
the enthronement of the Metropolitan of Montenegro, due to lack of evidence.  
In February 2024, the Niksic Basic Court ruled that the police used excessive force to 
dismantle the peaceful civic protest and that the state failed to prove the legality and 
proportionality of the police action.  
In 2023, the National Prevention Mechanisms (NPM) received 76 complaints, from 
individuals deprived of liberty, against the Administration for Execution of Criminal Sanctions 
and 52 against the Police Administration. The NPM issued 63 recommendations to 
institutions and relevant ministries. 
Execution of sentences with imprisonment  
In June 2023, the government 
adopted the 2023-2024 action plan 
for the 2023-2026 strategy for the 
execution of criminal penalties. 
Parts of the existing prison and 
remand 
facilities 
underwent 
adaptation 
and 
modernisation. 
Preparations for constructing the 
new prison facility in Mojkovac and 
four facilities in Spuz are ongoing.  
Despite some improvement, the 
material conditions in prisons, pre-
trial 
detention 
facilities 
and 
psychiatric hospitals are still below 
international standards. Poor conditions and severe overcrowding in remand prisons in 
Podgorica and Bijelo Polje and the living conditions and hygiene in the overcrowded Dobrota 
psychiatric hospital remain issues of concern.  
Protection of personal data  
The Law on personal data protection remains to be aligned with the EU acquis. Montenegro 
has not yet ratified the 2018 Council of Europe Protocol amending the Convention for the 
Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data (CETS 223).  
76.9
11
78.5
13
0
20
40
60
80
100
Occupancy rate (%)
Average duration of pre-trial
detention (months)
Graph 11: Montenegro - Prisons 
2022
2023
Source: Administation for execution of criminal sanctions


===== PAGE 38 =====
 
37 
 
The human and 
financial 
capacity as well 
as 
the 
IT 
expertise of the 
Agency 
for 
Personal 
Data 
Protection 
and 
Free Access to 
Information 
does not match 
the agency’s legal responsibilities. In January 2024, a new Director of the Agency was 
appointed.  
Freedom of religion or belief  
The rights to freedom of religion or belief are broadly respected. In April 2024, the 
Constitutional Court rejected the pending requests to assess the constitutionality of the Law 
on the amendments to the Law on freedom of religion or belief and the legal status of 
religious communities, and the Fundamental Agreement between the State of Montenegro 
and the Serbian Orthodox Church.  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Freedom of expression 
Protection of journalists  
The authorities provided a generally prompt and effective institutional and law enforcement 
response to new cases of violence against journalists. In April 2024, the Supreme State 
Prosecutor (SSP) issued a binding instruction to all state prosecutor's offices, mandating 
urgent intensification of investigations into cases involving violence against journalists, and 
attacks on media property.  
The SSP also instructed the prosecution to provide prompt feedback on all the 
recommendations made by the ad hoc commission for monitoring cases of violence against 
media. In December 2023, the Special State Prosecutor's Office (SSPO) filed an indictment 
in the case of the 2018 shooting of an investigative journalist. The Podgorica High Court 
confirmed the indictment in August 2024 
The authorities reported, and independent sources confirmed, a notable decrease in the 
number of cases of violence against media in 2023, with 11 cases registered by the police 
(in 2022: 22 cases). However, concerns remain about the several incidents of harassment by 
senior public officials reported by journalists in 2024.  
Legislative environment  
The new media legislation, which was enacted in June 2024, provided a number of 
legislative improvements, including the alignment with the EU's Audiovisual Media Services 
Directive. In October 2023, the government adopted its 2023-2027 Media Strategy, with the 
accompanying action plan for 2023-2024.  
It is the first government strategy in the field of media policy, designed through extensive 
engagement with civil society and the media, and it aims to promote an environment 
conducive to free and professional journalism. 
Implementation of legislation/institutions  
The legal provisions regulating the transparency of public funding allocations for media are 
127
4
4
0
n/a
87
20
20
0
n/a
0
50
100
150
Inspections
Complaints
received
Decisions
Administrative
sanctions
Declarations of
data breaches
Graph 12: Montenegro - Data protection
2022
2023
Source: Agency for Personal Data Protection and Free Access to Information 
n/a: not available


===== PAGE 39 =====
 
38 
 
yet to be fully implemented. Only 37% of active media and 9% of public sector entities 
complied with the legal requirement to disclose the public funding received and allocated to 
media, respectively. The new media legislation addresses the issue of registration for online 
media, which remains to be implemented in practice in line with applicable international 
standards.  
Public service broadcaster  
In December 2023, Parliament adopted an amendment to the Law on Radio and Television 
of Montenegro (RTCG), providing for continuity of predictable funding for RTCG. The new 
Law on RTCG was enacted in June 2024.  
First-instance courts delivered two rulings overturning as unlawful the RTCG Council’s re-
appointment of its Director-General in June 2023. In April and May 2024 two first instance 
rulings found the June 2023 re-appointment of the RTCG Director General as unlawful. Both 
rulings were appealed. A preliminary criminal investigation into the case is ongoing. The 
RTCG Director-General resigned in July 2024, but continued to serve as acting Director-
General. In August 2024, the RTCG Council appointed the same person to a full-term 
position, raising questions about lack of transparency and possible breach of legal 
procedure. The competent national authorities need to effectively address any situations of 
possible unlawful conduct at the RTCG, in line with the national legislation and relevant 
international and European standards. 
Economic factors 
The economic viability of commercial media remained constrained by a relatively small 
audience base and limited advertising market. The new Media Law introduced a major 
increase in state funding for content of public interest in broadcast, print and online media, 
raising the Media Pluralism and Diversity Fund from 0.09% to 0.2% of the current national 
budget. This made public funding an increasingly significant source of income for the 
commercial media.  
Internet  
Internet provision functioned without undue restrictions.  
Freedom of artistic expression 
In May 2024, a manager of a public theatre in Niksic refused to allow the staging of a 
theatrical play addressing the issue of gender equality and violence against women. The 
decision was condemned by public authorities, including the Ombudsperson’s Office.  
Professional organisations and working conditions 
The media landscape is pluralistic, but highly polarised, with the media community divided 
along political lines. Only around 10% of media outlets were involved in some form of self-
regulation. The rare existing self-regulation instruments are fragmented, with the public 
largely unaware of the complaint mechanisms available to them.  
Overall, media professionals continued to report poor working conditions, including salaries 
below the national average, self-censorship and various forms of pressure and undue 
influence, both external and within their editorial offices. No progress was made towards the 
signing of the long-overdue sectoral collective agreement for the media industry.  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Freedom of assembly and association  
The rights to freedom of assembly and association are broadly respected. 
Labour and trade union rights are covered in Chapter 19 - Social policy and employment. 


===== PAGE 40 =====
 
39 
 
Property rights  
The process of restoring properties expropriated in the past remained slow. In December 
2023, the Council of Europe Committee of Ministers adopted a Resolution on the closure of 
the case Nesic v. Montenegro concerning expropriation of costal land, assessing that 
Montenegro has taken all measures to execute the ECtHR decision. Montenegro needs to 
ensure fair restitution proceedings within a reasonable time and the full independence of the 
three Regional Restitution Commissions. 
Non-discrimination  
Social polarisation continued during the reporting period. The most vulnerable groups in 
society (including Roma and Egyptians, people with disabilities, LGBTIQ people) continued to 
be subjected to discrimination, hate speech and hate crime. Significant progress on the 
criminalisation of racism and hate speech has been made with the amendments to the 
Criminal Code adopted in December 2023, aiming to align it with relevant EU acquis.  
There is scope to increase the number of prosecuted cases based on the amended Code, 
and ensure appropriate institutional follow-up, including by law enforcement. A new Law on 
Prohibition of Discrimination is being finalised with the support of the European 
Commission, aiming to fully align with the EU acquis and European standards on anti-
discrimination.  
In 2023, the Ombudsperson’s Office worked on 243 complaints of discrimination (2022: 
256). As in previous years, most complaints were related to labour and employment. In 
2023, the Ombudsperson processed 12 cases of hate speech and 7 cases in the field of 
public discourse / media (2022: 16 and 14, respectively).  
Gender equality  
The Ministry of Human and Minority Rights’ mid-term evaluation of implementation of the 
2021-2025 National Gender Equality Strategy and its 2023-2024 action plan showed a strong 
downward trend of budget allocations for gender equality and the marginalisation of gender 
equality on the political agenda.  
The Law on gender equality is not sufficiently aligned with the EU acquis and international 
standards. Policy measures for achieving and improving gender equality, the obligation to 
perform gender analysis in different sectors and the institutional framework for achieving 
gender equality are not defined. A new law on legal gender recognition on the basis of self-
determination remains to be adopted.  
In July 2023, the second Gender Equality Index in Montenegro was published, with a score of 
59.3, an improvement of 4.3 index value points compared to 2019, but it is still 9.3 index 
points below the EU-27 average. The index shows the highest gap in gender equality in the 
area of power, and the lowest gap in the area of health, compared to the EU-27 average.  
In May 2024, the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women 
(CEDAW) published its concluding observations on the third periodic report on Montenegro. 
It welcomed the progress achieved since 2017 on legislative reforms, but noted with 
concern the lack of penalties for non-compliance with the Gender Equality Law, the only law 
that provides clear and legally binding requirements for incorporating gender into all aspects 
of policymaking and carrying out gender-related analysis.  
It also noted that women’s access to justice and the national institutions for promoting 
women’s advancement still need to be improved and it called for an end to harmful practices 
such as sex-selective abortions and patriarchal attitudes and gender stereotypes regarding 
the roles of women and men in the family and in society. 


===== PAGE 41 =====
 
40 
 
Gender-based violence remains 
a matter of serious concern. In 
July 2023, the National plan for 
the 
implementation 
of 
the 
2023-2027 Istanbul Convention 
was adopted. The December 
2023 
amendments 
to 
the 
Criminal Code were adopted, 
defining 
sexual 
harassment 
and ‘violence in a family or 
family 
community’ 
as 
new 
criminal offences. This will 
bring more operational clarity 
as to when domestic violence 
qualifies as a misdemeanour or 
a criminal offence.  
However, it does not address femicide, digital violence and gender-based hate speech. The 
definitions of gender-based violence and domestic violence across legislation need to be 
further aligned with the Istanbul Convention and the recommendations by the Group of 
Experts on Action against Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (GREVIO). The 
effective implementation of the legislative framework also needs to be improved. 
Rape crisis and/or sexual violence referral centres have still not been set up. Measures to 
ensure wider levels of awareness of the harmful effects of domestic violence on children are 
missing, as well as adequate resources for psycho-social counselling for the children 
affected. Protection orders need be available for immediate protection to all victims of 
domestic violence as well as access to free legal aid for all victims, in particular through 
active measures to ensure victims are aware of this right. The database for domestic 
violence as part of the Integrated Social Welfare Information System (SWIS) covers cases of 
domestic and non-gender-based violence.  
In 2023, of all imposed misdemeanour penalties, the most frequent were fines (29%), and 
20% of cases ended with an acquittal. Prison sentences were imposed in only around 10% of 
all cases. Restraining orders were issued in only 18% and evictions of perpetrators from the 
apartment in only 8% of completed cases. The range of available emergency measures to 
protect victims during ongoing proceedings is rarely used. 80% of misdemeanour cases last 
up to 6 months.   
Rights of the child  
The legislative and institutional framework is largely aligned with the EU acquis, international 
human rights instruments, including all areas covered by the UN Convention on the Rights of 
the Child and its optional protocols. Challenges remain in effectively implementing the 
legislative and institutional framework, due to a poor accountability framework, 
inappropriate and insufficient capacity, lack of systematic monitoring and sufficient funding, 
and lack of quality assurance for existing laws, strategies and action plans.  
In 2023, the Children’s Rights Council did not meet regularly. On 29 December 2023, the 
government adopted a decision on the new composition of the Council, chaired by the Vice 
Prime Minister for Demography and Youth, but it held only three thematic sessions. The 
recent amendments to the Criminal Code aligned the definition of a child with the 
recommendations of Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC), significantly tightened the 
penal policy regarding child sexual abuse and introduced specific surveillance measures for 
perpetrators after they are released from prison.  
330
155
1
481
253
1
496
189
2
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Police reports
Final criminal
convictions
Violence against women
Femicides
Graph 13: Montenegro- Violence against women 
(including domestic and sexual violence)
2021
2022
2023
Source: Ministry of interior


===== PAGE 42 =====
 
41 
 
There was no follow-up on UN monitoring bodies’ recommendations and Resolution 1468 of 
the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly, recommending that Montenegro amend its 
family law and raise the minimum age for entering a marriage to 18 years, without 
exception. Montenegro is late in submitting its fourth periodic report to the UN CRC (it was 
due in November 2023).   
Violence against children remains a matter of serious concern. In August, Montenegro 
established a paedophiles register with currently 98 registered individuals. Access to justice 
for children, in particular in vulnerable groups, still needs to be improved. Child-friendly 
proceedings are implemented only sporadically in criminal court cases for children in 
conflict with the law, child victims and witnesses of crime, while in civil and family 
law-related and misdemeanour proceedings children are often invisible. The amendments to 
the law on the Treatment of Juveniles in Criminal Proceedings – which should guarantee 
better protection for children in criminal proceedings and which define ‘child’ as 
recommended by the CRC – are pending adoption . An updated Strategy on prevention and 
protection of children from violence is not in place.  
In 2023, the Ombudsperson received 240 complaints related to children’s rights (2022: 237)  
Persons with disabilities  
Persons with disabilities cannot fully exercise their rights and continue facing multiple forms 
of discrimination. There was no progress in this area except the re-establishment of the 
Directorate for Persons with Disabilities at the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights 
(MHMR) and the establishment the Council for the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in April 
2024, which had its constitutive session on 19 July 2024. Montenegro needs to ensure 
implementation of the provisions of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities.  
Montenegro has yet to adopt the draft law on a unified disability assessment body, which 
will be the basis for reforming the system to bring about more just, more equal and easier 
access to rights, enabling a shift from a medical to a human rights-based model. 
Montenegro has yet to adopt the law on professional rehabilitation and employment of 
persons with disabilities, which would also regulate the location and management of the 
corresponding fund. The National Council for the rights of persons with disabilities, the 
entity in charge of monitoring the implementation of all laws and strategies to promote 
rights and to support better coordination on disability, remains unable to exercise its 
functions. The recommendations of the UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities from 2017 are not fulfilled, especially regarding the necessary reform of 
guardianship and decision-making on behalf of persons with disabilities. Montenegro has 
not adopted an action plan to implement the Committee’s recommendations. Some 
definitions of disability in Montenegrin legislation use derogatory terminology.  
Likewise, Montenegro has yet to adopt a strategy on deinstitutionalisation, with the 
meaningful involvement of relevant civil society stakeholders. 
LGBTIQ persons  
On 27 June 2024, Montenegro adopted the 2024-2028 Strategy for improving the quality of 
life of LGBTIQ persons together with its action plan for 2024-2025. The previous strategy for 
2019-2023 did not achieve its objective of improving social acceptance of LGBTIQ people 
and their access to labour, services and support services.  
Although the revised Criminal Code was aligned with the 2020 same-sex partnership law, by 
including crimes directed at civil partnerships as criminal acts against marriage and family, 
further efforts are needed to align all other relevant implementing legislation. Anti-LGBTIQ 
and misogynistic hate speech and political rhetoric continued to be a serious issue. During 


===== PAGE 43 =====
 
42 
 
2023, the Police Directorate received 264 reports against 264 people for hate speech 
against LGBTIQ people.  
Procedural rights and victims’ rights  
The 2023 amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code are not yet fully aligned with the EU 
acquis and European and international standards on victims’ rights and procedural 
safeguards. Montenegro still needs to further align  the criminal legislation with the Victims’ 
Rights Directive, to ensure that all provisions are implemented, and that the rights provided 
therein apply to all victims of all crimes. Amendments to the Law on free legal aid remain to 
be adopted . Comprehensive data on free legal aid is lacking as it depends on the new 
judicial information system. In 2023, the amount spent on free legal aid was EUR 106 476 
(2021: EUR 108 776).  
Protection of minorities 
The Law on minority rights and freedoms ensures the protection of human rights and 
freedoms for all citizens, including the right to publicly manifest national, ethnic, cultural, 
religious and linguistic identity. Montenegro adopted its 2024-2028 Minority Policy Strategy  
and its 2024-2025 action plan on 11 July 2024. The threshold for political representation of 
Roma in Parliament, which would ensure equal treatment of minorities, has still not been 
reduced.  
Roma  
The level of discrimination against Roma remains high. Since October 2023, the Assembly of 
the capital city of Podgorica has one Roma representative, for the first time. There has been 
limited progress in implementing the Poznan Declaration commitments, due to the lack of 
coordination and political will to prioritise Roma inclusion. In June 2024, the report on the 
implementation of the 2023 action plan and the 2024-2025 action plan for the 
Implementation of the Strategy for the social inclusion of Roma and Egyptians were adopted 
by the government. 
School attendance among the Roma population is very low. The constant poor quality of 
education negatively affects learning outcomes and transition to higher levels of education. 
The practice of arranged child marriages in Roma communities remains a concern. Roma 
children still face significant barriers and inequalities in their access to basic services such 
as healthcare, nutrition and housing.  
The state employs and pays Roma education mediators and Roma mediators in the area of 
employment, social care and healthcare. A significant number of Roma are employed in the 
informal economy. 96% of Roma registered with the Employment Agency have either no 
qualifications or the lowest level of qualifications. There are limited results regarding re-
skilling or upskilling of Roma and no progress on formalising their informal employment. 
There are no social housing quotas for Roma. 
Refugees and internally displaced persons 
Regarding displaced and internally displaced persons, from 7 November 2009 to 31 March 
2024, there were 15 274 requests for permanent or temporary residence. Of these, 15 172 
requests were resolved, and 102 cases are still pending. A total of 12 422 people received 
permanent or temporary residence of up to 3 years, 297 requests were refused, and 2 453 
cases were suspended due to incomplete or duplicated requests.  
Since the entry into force of the new Law on foreigners in 2018 and April 2024, 10 people 
were recognised as stateless, out of 29 submitting the request. Montenegro has yet to adopt 
amendments to the Law on foreigners to strengthen the statelessness determination 
procedure, as regards procedural guarantees and rights during the procedure and on 


===== PAGE 44 =====
 
43 
 
recognition of stateless status.  
Citizenship rights  
The investor citizenship scheme expired on 31 December 2022. Montenegro introduced 
procedures in the screening of pending applications, to check whether applicants are on the 
sanctions list or recognised as entities whose funds come from illegal sources. Montenegro 
should refrain from operating an investor citizenship scheme, as such schemes pose risks 
as regards security, money laundering, tax evasion, terrorist financing, corruption and 
infiltration by organised crime, and are incompatible with the EU acquis. 
2.2.2 Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security  
The EU has common rules for border control, visas, external migration and asylum. Schengen 
cooperation entails the lifting of border controls inside the EU. There is also cooperation in the 
fight against organised crime and terrorism, and judicial, police and customs cooperation, all 
with the support of the EU Justice and Home Affairs agencies. 
Fight against organised crime  
Montenegro has continued to work on aligning its legal framework on organised crime with 
the EU acquis. 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment  
Progress was made in the reporting period on aligning national legislation further with the 
EU acquis regarding the legal framework on police cooperation and organised crime. 
In December 2023, Parliament adopted amendments to the Criminal Code, including its 
alignment with the UN Firearms Protocol, by explicitly criminalising illicit firearms trafficking, 
carrying firearms and tampering with firearms markings. However, Montenegro needs to 
amend the Law on weapons to become aligned with the EU acquis including in relation to the 
technical standards of marking of firearms, deactivation of firearms, as well as alarm and 
signal weapons. 
The amendments to the Criminal Code also introduced an explicit provision on non-
punishment of victims of trafficking in human beings in line with the EU acquis. Furthermore, 
changing the term ‘minor’ to ‘child’ raised the age at which children can be considered to 
have been trafficked from 14 to 18 years. It also introduced a new criminal offence for the 
sale of children.  
In December 2023, Parliament adopted the Law on prevention of money laundering and 
financing of terrorism and the Law on games of chance. As a consequence, Montenegro 
was not made one of the Financial Action Taskforce (FATF) jurisdictions under increased 
monitoring (the ‘grey list’). In May 2024, Parliament adopted amendments to the Law on 
seizure and confiscation of material benefit derived from criminal activity, to address legal 
obstacles to confiscating criminal assets, including setting strict deadlines for the 
prosecution and the courts in finalising investigations and applying provisional measures.  
The Central Bank of Montenegro does not have a central register of non-resident accounts, a 
crucial tool for investigations. Montenegro did not address the problem of its incomplete 
land cadastre, which hampers the conduct of financial investigations and the confiscation of 
assets.  
There was significant progress in setting up a fully functional interoperable system with a 
single search feature. The Division for international Police Operative Cooperation is the 
single point of contact (SPOC) centre and has adequate capacity. In the reporting period a 
clear needs assessment was drafted and procurement and work to construct a new 
operational centre started.  


===== PAGE 45 =====
 
44 
 
The police Department of Internal control and the Ministry of Interior’s anti-corruption unit 
have overlapping competences and should be urgently reorganised. Further effort needs to 
be made to combat corruption within law enforcement agencies.  
In September 2024, Parliament adopted amendments to the Law on internal affairs 
concerning the recruitment of police officers. The preparation of these amendments was 
carried out without a public consultation and without the participation of non-governmental 
organisations. Montenegro needs to ensure that appointments in law enforcement 
authorities are merit-based and procedural safeguards against undue political interference 
in law enforcement authorities are in place. 
Implementation and enforcement capacity  
Montenegro established good cooperation with CEPOL, Eurojust, Europol and Interpol. In 
2023, Montenegro participated in 54 operational actions across 14 operational action plans 
(OAPs) and in several joint action days (JAD) under the European Multidisciplinary Platform 
against Criminal Threats (EMPACT).  
Regarding organised crime, in 2023, the High Court in Podgorica had a total of 97 cases 
pending against 761 defendants (690 individuals and 71 legal entities).  
In relation to money laundering, in 2023 the High Court in Podgorica had a total of 11 cases 
pending against 86 people (70 natural persons and 16 legal entities), of which five cases 
were related to organised crime in conjunction with money laundering. In 2023, three new 
cases were received. One case of money laundering, which took the form of an independent 
criminal offence against a single defendant, was resolved by an acquittal, which has not yet 
become final. 
In 2023, the SSPO issued five investigations for the criminal offence of money laundering 
against 13 people and one extension of an investigation against one person. The estimated 
total amount of funds acquired through criminal activities and placed in legal channels 
amounts to EUR 8 132 822. The data shows an increase (compared with 2022) in 
investigation and prosecution, but also shows that the capacity to address money 
laundering is limited. There is a lack of cases of stand-alone money laundering.  
In 2023, the courts determined temporary security measures in 17 cases of organised crime 
against 67 defendants (56 individuals and 11 legal entities) including bans on the disposal 
and use of immovable property and the freezing of assets.  
The data shows an improvement compared with 2022, the Financial Investigation Unit (FIU) 
is very proactive and the SSPO has initiated more investigations. However, there is a limited 
capacity to conduct financial investigations.  
Prosecutors, financial forensic experts and the FIU frequently rely on open-source databases 
such as the land registry and tax administration. Despite the increase in the number of 
financial investigations opened, the number of confiscations has remained low.  
Extended confiscation is not consistently applied and the disproportionality in assets of the 
convicted people is not consistently taken into account by judges and prosecutors when 
deciding if extended confiscation should be applied. The capacity to manage seized assets 
and avoid the loss of their commercial value should also be strengthened. 
In cybercrime, the police submitted 23 cases to the relevant prosecution offices, of which 
eight (involving 11 people) were related to online child sexual abuse. Regarding this crime, 
significant progress was made during the reporting period both in prevention and 
repression. The SPO issued two indictments concerning cybercrime. Montenegro’s legal 
framework is aligned with the Budapest Convention.  
In the field of people smuggling, in 2023 criminal charges were brought against 16 people 


===== PAGE 46 =====
 
45 
 
for smuggling 44 migrants. The SPO indicted one person.  
In 2023, the track record of prosecutions and convictions for trafficking in human beings 
continued to improve. During 2023, the Police Directorate submitted 16 criminal charges to 
the prosecution (2022: 9; 2021: 5) which resulted in seven indictments (2022: 5; 2021: 4) 
following investigations conducted by the prosecution services. And, for the first time in 2 
years, the courts made two final convictions with enforceable decisions. Montenegro needs 
to improve victims’ access to information about their rights and trafficking-related trials.  
In 2023, the multidisciplinary team for the formal identification of victims of trafficking in 
human beings identified 18 victims. In the context of increased online recruitment, there is a 
great need to support the process of victim identification. The capacity of labour inspectors 
and law enforcement agencies to combat trafficking for the purpose of labour exploitation 
needs to be strengthened, including for seasonal workers. Training on trafficking should be 
provided to prosecutors and judges. 
In January 2024, the Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare issued a 3-year licence to the 
NGO ‘SOS Hotline for women and children, victims of violence Niksic’, for a shelter which 
can accommodate up to three female victims of trafficking. In April 2024, a temporary state 
shelter for 10 child victims opened within the ‘Ljubovic’ complex in Podgorica. The support 
and assistance services for victims of trafficking should be improved, in particular for child 
victims and victims from vulnerable groups.  
Intersectoral cooperation was further strengthened in May 2024 with the signing of the 
revised Agreement on Mutual Cooperation in the Field of Combating Trafficking in Human 
Beings between judicial institutions, ministries and non-governmental organisations (NGOs). 
In the area of firearms, 261 criminal offences of unlawful possession of weapons and 
explosive substances were registered in 2023. A total of 724 weapons were seized in 2023 
(2022: 729).  
The number of users of the ‘Traffic’ application increased. ‘Traffic’ connects the Firearms 
Focal Point (FFP) to the ballistics laboratory and to the police unit in charge of international 
cooperation, enabling the secure exchange of data.  
Police officers were trained 
to use the iARMS database. 
Montenegro’s data collection 
and reporting system on 
firearms 
needs 
to 
be 
standardised. 
During 
the 
reporting period, standard 
operating procedures were 
developed 
for 
the 
FFP. 
Border police capacities to 
prevent and counter illicit 
arms 
trafficking 
were 
increased 
through 
the 
delivery 
of 
detection 
equipment and through the 
Firearms Detection Training 
conducted jointly with the 
European Border and Coast 
Guard Agency (Frontex) in 
Croatia.  
The Forensic Centre made 
*Data on serious crime cases stem from the aggregation of cases of money laundering, cybercrime, 
production and trafficking of drugs, firearms related offenses, terrorism, trafficking in human beings and 
smuggling of persons. Corruption cases are showcased in Chapter 23. In addition, Montenegro also 
reported 3 convictions for tobacco smuggling in 2023 (compared with 3 in 2022 and 10 in 2021). 
103
223
145
179
127
270
70
299
109
207
173
283
46
118
34
100
11
124
44
116
20
95
4
118
0
100
200
300
400
Organised
crimes
Serious
crimes
Organised
crimes
Serious
crimes
Organised
crimes
Serious
crimes
2021
2022
2023
Graph 14: Montenegro - Serious* and organised crime 
cases
Number of individuals / legal entities under Investigation
Individuals / legal entities indicted
Final court decision
Final convictions
Source: National data collected via the organised
crime and corruption track record (OCCTR) e-platform


===== PAGE 47 =====
 
46 
 
significant progress in its procedures and processes, in line with the relevant international 
standards ISO 17020 and ISO 17025, and it approved all documents for the accreditation of 
a method of the Arson and Explosives Laboratory. In 2023, Montenegrin authorities 
destroyed 798 firearms by melting down.  
Despite the existence of a storage facility for small arms, light weapons and ammunition in 
Rogame, until the end of the legal proceedings seized weapons are stored in inappropriate 
storage and safety conditions in the SPO premises.  
Montenegro needs to increase efforts on awareness raising, outreach and education on the 
dangers and risks related to the misuse, illicit possession and trafficking of firearms. 
Measures aimed at reducing illicit firearms through legalisation, voluntary surrender, de-
activation and destruction should be implemented, in line with the EU action plan on 
firearms trafficking. 
As regards tobacco smuggling, 21 criminal charges were filed against five legal entities and 
39 people. Among those, six are Customs Administration officials, four of whom are 
members of the Commission for the Destruction of Confiscated Cigarettes. The ban on 
storage of tobacco products in the free zone of the port of Bar led to the seizure of an 
unprecedented number of cigarettes. Despite assistance offered by the EU and the United 
Kingdom, the process of destruction has not yet taken place. In 2023, there was no final 
court decision on tobacco smuggling. Montenegro needs to make stronger efforts to 
address the illicit trade of cigarettes. This would involve strengthening the capacity of all 
institutions involved, further strengthening the work of the whole judicial chain, dismantling 
criminal networks, and improving the track record in final convictions and confiscations of 
the proceeds of crime. 
Cooperation in the field of drugs 
Cooperation in the field of drugs needs to be improved.  
Institutional set-up and legal alignment  
Montenegro’s strategic and regulatory framework in this area is not fully aligned with the EU 
acquis. The national drug information system does not fully meet European standards. 
Montenegro has had no drug strategy in place since the previous strategy came to an end in 
2020. The capacity of the Directorate for the prevention of drug abuse in the Ministry of 
Health, which embeds the National Drug Observatory, was further strengthened. The 
involvement of the National Drug Observatory in the activities of the EU Drugs Agency 
(EUDA) is satisfactory and the national early warning system is operational and considered 
ready to be linked to the EU early 
warning system. Preparations are 
ongoing between the EUDA and 
Montenegro 
on 
a 
Working 
Arrangement. 
Implementation and enforcement 
capacity  
Montenegro continued to be a 
transit country for drugs as a part 
of the Balkan route. In 2023, a 
total of 960 kg of drugs were 
seized. 
In the reporting period, the courts 
were working on 19 cases against 
131 individuals and resolved one 
196
249
106
104
168
179
99
95
233
249
121
116
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Number of
individuals /
legal entities
under
Investigation
Individuals /
legal entities
indicted
Final court
decision
Final
convictions
Graph 15: Montenegro - Cases related to 
production and trafficking of drugs
2021
2022
2023
Source: National data collected via the organised
crime and corruption track record (OCCTR) e-platform


===== PAGE 48 =====
 
47 
 
case against one defendant, with a final conviction. 
Montenegro did not address the insufficient storage capacity for seized drugs and has yet to 
make legislative changes to keep only a sample of drugs as evidence for court proceedings.  
Montenegro has sufficient operational capacity allowing it to actively engage in international 
police cooperation on drugs related cases, including via Europol and Interpol. 
Fight against terrorism  
Fight against terrorism is satisfactory. 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment  
Montenegro’s legal framework on the fight against terrorism is largely in line with the EU 
acquis and international instruments on anti-terrorism. Montenegro continues to implement 
measures in the EU-Montenegro Implementing Arrangement of the Joint Action Plan on 
Counter-Terrorism for the Western Balkans. In the light of the progress made, in November 
2023, Montenegro and the EU signed a revised bilateral arrangement and the country 
submitted its sixth implementing report in June 2024. Montenegro should continue to 
implement the actions agreed under the Joint Action Plan on Counter Terrorism for the 
Western Balkans and keep its strategic and legislative framework up to date and aligned to 
the EU legislative acquis and policy priorities. 
In December 2023, the government appointed the third National Coordinator in 2 years. In 
December 2023, the Ministry of Interior established a new National Operational Team (NOT) 
for the prevention and suppression of radicalisation, violent extremism, terrorism, money 
laundering and terrorism financing. In February 2024, the Bureau for Operational 
Coordination of Intelligence-Security Sector Bodies created an interdepartmental working 
group to establish a national ‘watch list’ in line with UN Security Council resolution 2396. In 
December 2023, the Passenger Data Collection Group commenced the pilot phase of data 
collection from airlines.  
Implementation and enforcement capacity  
During 2023, no individual was convicted of a terrorism offence. A cause for concern is the 
growing right-wing extremist content online, hate speech and disinformation, exacerbated by 
Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine and the war in Gaza.  
An investigation against nine suspects indicted for criminal offences (for creating a criminal 
organisation) has been ongoing since 2020. The retrial of 13 defendants (including two 
Russian and eight Serbian citizens) found guilty of terrorism in the 2016 coup attempt case 
ended in July 2024 with the acquittal of all defendants. The prosecutor can still appeal this 
judgement. 
In 2023, due to the change of the National Coordinator and the NOT, implementation was 
limited for the two National Strategies on ‘Prevention of Terrorism, Money Laundering and 
Terrorism Financing 2022-2025’ and on ‘Prevention and Suppression of Radicalisation and 
Violent Extremism 2020-2024’ and their action plans.  
Montenegro actively participated in the EU Radicalisation Awareness Network (RAN). It 
continued its good cooperation with Europol on foreign terrorist fighters. In 2023, the 
number of messages exchanged with foreign counterterrorism units through Europol’s 
Secure Information Exchange Network Application (SIENA) communication link rose to 480 
(from 342 in 2022).  
The problem of foreign terrorist fighters is limited in Montenegro. There is currently no intent 
to repatriate the 14 foreign terrorist fighters and family members reported to be in Syria and 
Iraq.  


===== PAGE 49 =====
 
48 
 
Judicial cooperation in civil and criminal matters is satisfactory. 
 Montenegro should further improve the speed and efficiency of international judicial 
cooperation by increasing its use of judicial cooperation instruments, such as joint 
investigations teams and direct court-to-court cooperation. In February 2024, Montenegro 
signed the Ljubljana-Hague Convention on International Cooperation in the Investigation and 
Prosecution of the Crime of Genocide, Crimes against Humanity, War Crimes and Other 
International Crimes.  
The LURIS database, an electronic system for monitoring cases of judicial cooperation, is 
functional. In 2023, there were 959 cases (117 with EU Member States  of judicial 
cooperation in criminal cases, while in judicial cooperation in civil matters there were 459 
cases (171 with EU Member States ).  
In 2023, there 
was 
intense 
cooperation 
between 
Montenegro and 
Eurojust, with 76 
cases of judicial 
cooperation 
processed 
by 
Montenegro 
with the support 
of 
Eurojust, 
including 
58 
cases 
initiated 
by Montenegro. 
Montenegro 
continued 
to 
participate in the Eurojust regional project ‘Increasing cross-border cooperation in criminal 
justice in the Western Balkans’ (WB CRIM JUST). 
To date Montenegro has not engaged in any joint investigation teams (JITs) with an EU 
Member State.  
The working arrangement signed between the Montenegrin Supreme State Prosecution 
Office and the European Public Prosecutor’s Office (EPPO) in September 2022 has had 
limited effects in practice.  
Legal and irregular migration  
Institutional set-up and legal alignment  
The management of legal and irregular migration is satisfactory, and the legal framework is 
largely aligned with the EU acquis. The 2021-2025 strategy on migration and reintegration of 
returnees regulates best practice on legal migration, asylum, prevention of irregular 
migration, readmission, return, integration, internally displaced persons and statelessness.  
Implementation and enforcement capacity  
Montenegro is in the initial stages of implementing a modern migrant fingerprinting 
identification and registration system, connected to a central biometric database.  
356
239
293
271
190
356
345
275
301
283
269
603
701
514
594
554
459
959
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Civil
Criminal
Civil
Criminal
Civil
Criminal
2021
2022
2023
Graph 16: Montenegro - Requests for mutual assistance in civil and 
criminal matters
Incoming requests
Outgoing requests
Total
Source: Ministry of Justice
n/a: not available


===== PAGE 50 =====
 
49 
 
In 2023, 5 314 migrants were apprehended crossing the borders illegally, a 37% decline 
compared with 2022 (8 519), 
reflecting 
regional 
trends. 
The 
majority 
of 
these 
migrants register an intention 
to seek asylum, therefore 
benefiting 
from 
the 
two 
reception 
centres’ 
accommodation 
and 
provision of healthcare.  
In 2023, 83 migrants were 
detained in the detention 
centre for foreigners in Spuz 
(2022: 78). Montenegro is 
actively engaged in the EU 
regional project EU4FAST ‘Support to Strengthen the Fight against Migrant Smuggling and 
Trafficking in Human Beings in the Western Balkans’ and takes part in the Global Alliance 
against Migrant Smuggling, launched in November 2023.  
The readmission agreement with the EU continues to be implemented smoothly. As of 2023, 
Montenegro concluded implementing protocols with 15 EU Member States. The number of 
readmission requests from EU Member States continued to decline. In 2023, Montenegro 
processed 156 readmission requests from EU Member States. Of these, 85 requests were 
accepted. In 2023, Montenegro accepted 43 returnees (2022: 71) and drew up readmission 
plans on their return to Montenegro. 
Montenegro has 11 readmission agreements with non-EU countries, including all Western 
Balkan partners and Türkiye but none with any of the main countries of origin of migrants 
coming to Montenegro. The quality of implementation of these readmission agreements 
continues to improve. Readmission from Montenegro to neighbouring countries (including 
Croatia) fell to 70 people in 2023 (from 87 in 2022). Readmissions of non-EU nationals from 
neighbouring countries to Montenegro also continued to decline, with 50 readmissions in 
2023, mainly from Croatia (36). In 2023, 31 voluntary returns were carried out (2022: 37). 
The border police carried out 19 returns to neighbouring countries and the International 
Organisation for Migration carried out 12 returns. 
Montenegro must continue to develop its international cooperation on readmission, increase 
its capacity to prosecute migrant smuggling networks, establish a modern data collection 
system for screening migrants and refugees and improve the coordinated approach by all 
actors responsible for managing mixed migration flows. 
Asylum 
The management of asylum is good. 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment  
Montenegro’s legal framework is largely aligned with the EU acquis. Cooperation with the EU 
Agency for Asylum is very good and continued to reinforce Montenegro’s overall asylum 
system.  
In 2023, 4 998 people registered an intention to request asylum (2022: 8 320), reflecting a 
downward trend in irregular entries. In 2023, equipment was installed in Bozaj for the 
electronic acquisition of biometric data from migrants who expressed their intention to 
apply for asylum.  
The Directorate for Asylum continued to reduce the backlog for handling asylum 
1929
448
316
3405
5181
1284 698
8519
2429
747
722
5314
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
Afghanistan
Morocco
Iran
Total
Afghanistan
Iran
Bangladesh
Total
Afghanistan
Iran
Pakistan
Total
2021
2022
2023
Graph 17: Montenegro - Number of irregular 
movements 
Source: Ministry of Interior


===== PAGE 51 =====
 
50 
 
applications and decides on requests for international protection within 6 months, except in 
complex cases.  
In 2023, the Directorate overturned fewer decisions at second instance, reflecting a better 
quality determination process. The quality of the status determination procedure for 
refugees was improved (113 interviews in 2023, compared to 63 in 2022), resulting in an 
increase in positive decisions of 56%.  
In 2023, the Directorate for Asylum improved its staffing by two more officials, including the 
head of the procedure. Montenegro needs to continue increasing staffing levels for the 
status determination procedure.  
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
In 2023, the number of 
asylum 
seekers 
accommodated in reception 
centres was 3 093, a 50% 
decline compared with 2022 
(6 202). Montenegro has 
two reception centres with 
164 
beds, 
however, 
the 
reception capacities must 
be further expanded to cope 
with 
possible 
increased 
migration flows, especially 
in 
view 
of 
future 
EU 
membership. 
In 
March 
2024, Montenegro signed 
contracts for preparing and 
coordinating 
construction 
and 
reconstruction 
projects 
to 
expand 
and 
improve 
accommodation capacities in the Spuz and Bozaj centres. 
Montenegro is the Western Balkan partner hosting the highest number of Ukrainian 
nationals having fled Russia’s war of aggression, both in absolute figures and proportionally 
to its population (1%). It continued to grant Ukrainian citizens with ‘temporary protection’ 
status, access to health services and accommodation beyond the minimum European 
standards, although it relied largely on ad hoc solutions. In March 2024, the Decision on 
granting temporary protection was prolonged for one year. 
Administrative barriers hinder access for these Ukrainians to healthcare, bank accounts and 
financial services, and several laws need to be aligned with the Law on asylum to ensure 
that temporary protection holders are entitled to their social rights. Written procedures for 
the approval and denial of requests for accommodation, including appeal procedures, are 
not in place.  
Visa policy 
The national visa regime continues not to be aligned with that of the EU. Progress is needed 
on the alignment of Montenegro’s visa policy with the EU’s list of visa-required countries, in 
particular as regards countries presenting irregular migration or security risks to the EU. The 
only progress made in 2024,  was the government adoption in April of  a decision on 
seasonal visa waivers, including the removal of seasonal visa waivers for citizens of 
Uzbekistan.  
Montenegro still has a visa-free regime with 11 countries that are on the EU list of visa-
required countries, of which seven enjoy permanent visa exemption (and four have a 
97
44
40
272
72
27
12
175
78
10
10
145
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Afghanistan
Morocco
Cuba
Total
Russia
Cuba
Afghanistan
Total
Russia
Cuba
Türkiye
Total
2021
2022
2023
Graph 18: Montenegro - Asylum applications
Source: Ministry of Interior


===== PAGE 52 =====
 
51 
 
seasonal visa waiver to enter Montenegro for tourism between April and October 2024. 
Seasonal visa exemption measures are not in line with the EU acquis. As part of its Reform 
Agenda under the Growth Plan, Montenegro committed to further align with the EU-list of 
visa-required countries, reach interoperability between its systems and databases used in 
the current visa approval system, start working on collecting biometric data as well as 
introduce additional security measures. 
Montenegro is gradually rolling out its Visa Information System (VIS). Currently, 31 of its 
diplomatic and consular missions are connected to the VIS.  
According to Eurostat, 360 Montenegro nationals applied for asylum in the EU27 in 2023 
(decrease by 11% compared to 410 in 2022). 
Schengen and external borders 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment  
The legislative framework for the management of external borders is largely aligned with the 
EU acquis. On 1 November 2023, the status agreement between Montenegro and the EU 
entered into force5. 
Electronic sea surveillance enables real-time image transmission to Montenegro’s Centre 
and the Frontex Coordinating Centre in Warsaw, a key mechanism for border control in the 
Adriatic Sea and rapid interception of suspicious vessels. 
On 31 December 2023, 1 075 out of 1 514 posts in the Border Police were filled (71%). 
Implementation and enforcement capacity  
In 2023, Montenegro conducted 647 joint border patrols with neighbouring countries (2022: 
500, 2021: 437). The activity of the joint police cooperation centres increased, with a higher 
volume of exchanged information. A total of 94 forged documents were seized. 
Border management equipment continued to be progressively upgraded in accordance with 
the Schengen action plan, but reliance on support from the EU and other donors remained 
high. The border police still lack proper capacity to monitor the purchase of equipment, set 
priorities and draw up a purchase plan, linked with the Schengen action plan.  
The Border Police established the Group for Suppression of Human Smuggling and Cross-
Border Crime to develop analytics and intelligence on smuggling networks. The Border 
police now have direct access to Europol's SIENA channel. In 2023, they started 
operational-investigative measures, in cooperation with the competent prosecutors and the 
criminal police, leading to the opening of several new SIENA cases to investigate groups of 
migrant smugglers operating throughout Montenegro. 
From 1 August 2023 onwards, border passes have been issued for inhabitants of cross-
border areas of Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina. During 2023, the Montenegrin 
authorities demolished alternative roads towards Bosnia and Herzegovina in six locations 
and towards Kosovo in six locations. 
Euro counterfeiting (criminal law aspect) 
The relevant legislation is broadly in line with the EU acquis on the suppression of 
counterfeit currency. The Criminal Code provides for the criminal offence of ‘counterfeiting 
money’. 
In 2023, six reports were received for the criminal offence of counterfeiting money, four 
indictments were filed and confirmed, and 10 indictments were pending before the court, 
 
5 Official Journal L 140, 30.5.2023 


===== PAGE 53 =====
 
52 
 
one of which ended in a conviction.  
All aspects of customs cooperation are covered in Chapter 29 – Customs Union. 
 
2.3. ECONOMIC CRITERIA 
 
2.3.1. The existence of a functioning market economy 
Economic governance 
The new coalition government adopted several major reforms. The government increased 
the minimum pension by 52% to EUR 450 from 2024 onwards. In September 2024 the 
government adopted the work programme, called Europe Now 2.0 and the related Medium-
Term Fiscal Strategy. Key reforms relate to increasing average minimum wage from EUR 
450 to EUR 700 and halving pension contributions. These measures pose a considerable risk 
to the sustainability of public finance, despite some compensatory measures and 
accelerated investment programme.  
The policy guidance set out in the conclusions of the Economic and Financial Dialogue of 
May 
2023 
was 
partially 
implemented. Progress was made in 
improving the budget balance and 
creating the legal basis for setting 
up a Fiscal Council, but structural 
reforms 
aiming 
to 
address 
informality 
and 
improve 
SOE 
governance 
saw 
only 
limited 
implementation. 
Macroeconomic stability 
Economic growth in 2023 continued 
Table 6.1:
2021
2022
2023
Montenegro - Key economic figures
GDP per capita (% of EU-27 in PPS)1)
46
47
50
52
Real GDP growth 
0.8
13.0
6.4
6.0
Activity rate of the population aged 15-64 (%), total
63.7
59.2
67.7
71.7
      female
56.8
52.9
61.4
66.3
      male
70.5
65.5
73.9
77.0
Unemployment rate of the population aged 15-64 (%), total
16.9
16.8
15.0
13.4
      female
17.0
16.1
13.1
14.3
      male
16.7
17.3
16.6
12.6
Employment of the population aged 15-64 (annual growth %)
0.1
-2.4
17.2
10.5
Nominal wages (annual growth %)
1.3
1.4
11.2
11.8
Consumer price index (annual growth %)
1.1
2.5
11.9
8.7
Exchange rate against EUR
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
Current account balance (% of GDP)
-16.8
-9.2
-12.9
-11.6
Net foreign direct investment, FDI (% of GDP)
10.3
11.7
13.2
6.3
General government balance (% of GDP)
-5.7
-1.9
-4.2
0.6
General government debt (% of GDP)
74.0
82.5
68.0
59.3
Notes : 
1) Eurostat
Source: national sources
2015-20 
average
-18
-15
-12
-9
-6
-3
0
3
6
9
12
15
18
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Graph 6.1: Montenegro - Real GDP growth
and contributions
Priv. cons.
Gov. cons.
GFCF
Stocks
Net exports
Real GDP growth
Source: WiiW
% y-o-y


===== PAGE 54 =====
 
53 
 
to be robust and broad-based. GDP growth is estimated to be 6.0%, somewhat below the 
2022 growth rate of 6.4%. Economic expansion was mainly driven by exports of services and 
private consumption, underpinned by growing disposable income and a large inflow of 
Russian, Ukrainian and Turkish nationals. Further support came from recovering investment 
and government consumption. Strong growth in exports, which benefited from a good 
tourism season, together with a considerable slowdown in import growth, resulted in a 
positive contribution of net exports to GDP growth. In the first quarter of 2024 the economy 
expanded by 4.4% y-o-y on the back of domestic demand. Overall, 3 years of strong growth 
brought Montenegro’s per capita GDP in purchasing power standards to 52% of the EU-27 
average in 2023. 
The current account deficit narrowed to 11.6% of GDP in 2023, owing to a strong tourism 
season and slower import growth. Surging services exports (+21%) offset a decline in 
merchandise exports caused by weaker performance in metal products. The growth in 
overall imports, which are much larger than exports, decelerated to 8.3% in 2023, following 
an exceptional 43% expansion a year before. The overall trade deficit declined by 3pps to 
18.8% of GDP in 2023. The 
surpluses in the primary and 
secondary accounts declined 
marginally and stood at 1% and 
6.4% 
of 
GDP 
in 
2023, 
respectively, the latter on the 
back of lower remittances. In 
the first quarter of 2024 the 
four-quarter 
moving 
average 
current account deficit widened 
to 13.8% of GDP due to a slump 
of merchandise exports and 
lower surpluses in primary and 
secondary income surpluses. 
More than half of the current account deficit was financed by net foreign direct investment 
(FDI) inflows in 2023, while the remainder was covered by reserves.6 Net FDI inflows 
declined by 45% year on year and amounted to 6.3% of GDP in 2023, with a large share 
traditionally going into real estate. The drop in FDI was driven by a combination of lower 
inflows of equity investment and inter-company debt, together with higher outflows (mainly 
the withdrawal of funds by non-residents). In the four quarters to March 2024, net FDI 
inflows remained broadly stable amounting to 6.2% of GDP. International reserves fell to 
EUR 1.4 billion in 2023, covering 3.4 months of imports of goods and services but improved 
to 4.7 months in early 2024 due to a decline in imports. 
Following the inflation easing throughout 2023, the downward trend continued in 2024. 
Throughout 2023, consumer price inflation was on a declining trend from 16.2% y-o-y in 
January to 4.3% in December and averaged 8.9% for the year as a whole. The decline was 
driven by abating pressures from global energy and food prices as well as monetary policy 
tightening in the euro area, albeit limited by domestic policy-induced increases in wages and 
pensions. In  March-April 2024 inflation bounced back to 5.5% y-o-y, but moderated to 3.5% 
in July. In March 2024 the government launched a programme to limit price increases for 
some basic food commodities. 
Due to extraordinary revenues, 2023 budget achieved a surplus of 0.6% of GDP, while 2024 
budget projection was revised in line with new developments. The 2023 outcome 
 
6 In 2023 there was a large increase in errors and omissions which stood at 10.7% of GDP as compared to 9.6% 
in 2022 and 5.6% in 2022. The surge in errors and omissions is likely due to the recovery of tourism and 
large inflows of foreign nationals. 
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Graph 6.2: Montenegro - Current account 
selected components and FDI
 Workers' remittances balance
Goods and services trade balance
Current account balance
Net FDI
% of GDP
Source: IMF and Central Bank of Montenegro 


===== PAGE 55 =====
 
54 
 
significantly overshot the revised deficit target of 3.4%, adopted in November. The key driver 
was a much higher budget revenue, which increased by 26.3% compared to 2022 and 
outweighed the increase in spending, which rose by 12.8%. Public revenue growth was 
driven by high consumer spending 
fuelled by a large inflow of foreign 
nationals and increasing wages, high 
inflation, a successful tourism season, 
improved tax discipline and one-off 
items.7 The main drivers on the 
spending side were higher social 
transfers, an increased wage bill and a 
surge in interest payments, while there 
was a decline in capital spending, 
worsening 
the 
quality 
of 
public 
spending. At the end of December 
2023, the parliament of Montenegro 
adopted the 2024 Budget Law, which envisages a significant deterioration in the budget 
balance, with a projected deficit of 3.4% of GDP, driven by expected strong growth in social 
transfers and capital spending and the absence of one-off revenue. The 2024 budget was 
revised due to better than planned revenue performance and measures related to Europe 
Now 2 programme, which are set to enter into force in October 2024. 
The public debt ratio declined in 2023, but large upcoming debt service obligations, 
coupled with newly adopted measures, point to vulnerabilities and require offsetting 
actions. At the end of 2023, the general government debt ratio decreased to 59.3% of GDP, 
down from 68% of GDP a year earlier. The marked reduction was driven by high nominal GDP 
growth and some use of government deposits to repay maturing debt. Due to good fiscal 
performance in 2023, the stock of government deposits increased to 2.3% of GDP at the end 
of 2023, up from 1.9% a year earlier. Large repayments of public debt, amounting to 7.6% 
and 11% of GDP, are due in 2024 and 2025, respectively, and will require substantial new 
borrowing. In March 2024, Montenegro successfully issued Eurobonds of EUR 687 million8 
at an effective rate of 5.88%. Fiscal projections, including new measures adopted in 
September 2024, set public debt at 63.3% at the end of 2024 with a rising trend to 65.2% in 
2027. 
Montenegro’s macroeconomic policy mix is constrained by the lack of an autonomous 
monetary policy. Fiscal policy is the main tool for managing aggregate demand. In view of 
debt-related vulnerabilities, large upcoming financing needs and measures adopted within 
the Europe Now 2 programme, a careful fiscal management with offsetting measures and 
an overall tighter fiscal stance appear appropriate.  
Functioning of product markets 
Business environment 
Efforts to improve the regulatory business environment have resumed. In March 2024, the 
Competitiveness Council adopted an action plan aiming to eliminate 11 key barriers to 
business by 2026. The dynamic development of local and foreign companies is hindered by 
the informal economy, inefficiencies and delays in dealings with the administration, 
excessive complexity of the legal framework and the administrative burden related to para-
 
7 Sources of one-off revenues included the economic citizenship programme, the termination of a hedging 
arrangement and the energy-related budget support from the EU. 
8 Montenegro issued Eurobonds in the amount of USD 750 million, with a maturity of 7 years and at an effective 
interest rate of 7.25%. Following a cross-currency transaction, the debt amounts to EUR 687 million, with a 
more favourable interest rate of 5.88%. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
-12
-8
-4
0
4
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Graph 6.3: Montenegro - Fiscal developments
Primary balance (lhs)
Interest (lhs)
GG balance (lhs)
Public debt (rhs)
Source: National sources
% of GDP


===== PAGE 56 =====
 
55 
 
fiscal charges as well as insufficient quality of e-services. Further obstacles are related to 
insufficient transparency in decision-making, arbitrary law interpretation and enforcement by 
public authorities and access to finance for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).  
The informal economy constitutes a major obstacle to Montenegro’s competitiveness. 
Deficiencies in the institutional and regulatory environment, weaknesses in the labour 
market, insufficient enforcement capacity on the part of the public authorities, corruption 
and tax non-compliance are all conducive to undeclared work, which is especially harmful to 
legally operating SMEs and microenterprises in the service sector. At the end of 2023, the 
government adopted a programme and action plan to address the informal economy, 
including measures to tackle tax avoidance and evasion, but it lacks a monitoring 
mechanism for reviewing its implementation.  
State influence on product markets 
While the government undertook measures to contain price increases, the transparency 
and efficiency of State aid in Montenegro remains weak. In March 2024, the government 
launched a price cap programme, in cooperation with the country’s largest supermarket 
chains, in an effort to prevent anti-competitive measures and address surging prices for 
basic food products, such as flour, sugar, oil and salt. The initiative was later expanded to 
include a broader range of products and support domestic producers. The Agency for 
Protection of Competition (APC) issued two decisions on unlawful State aid, which should 
be repaid. While Montenegro made progress towards ensuring better transparency of State 
aid decisions, further work is needed to increase awareness of State aid rules among aid 
grantors and to increase staff at the Agency for Protection of Competition (APC). The APC 
issued two decisions on unlawful State aid, which should be repaid. 
Privatisation and restructuring 
The privatisation of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) did not advance, but initial steps were 
undertaken to create a framework for improving SOE governance and profitability. The 
financial performance of Montenegro’s SOEs9, including those at the local level, should be 
improved by transforming their management structures and eliminating political patronage. 
This would also reduce SOE-related fiscal risks. While improvement of SOE governance 
featured prominently in Montenegro’s Economic Reform Programme in the last years, the 
progress was very slow. The Ministry of Finance continued the preparatory work on 
analysing the legal and regulatory framework for SOE reform and has received IMF technical 
assistance for assessing the SOE-related fiscal risks.  
Functioning of the financial market  
The banking system remained stable with adequate levels of liquidity and profitability. 
Most of the temporary measures aimed at preserving the liquidity and solvency of domestic 
banks expired during 2023. The central bank of Montenegro (CBM) strengthened the 
supervisory process in November 2023, by requiring credit institutions to pass the 
conformity check before paying dividends. The sector-wide capital adequacy ratio stood at 
19.5% in June 2024, well above the statutory minimum of 8%. Banks continued to fund 
themselves mainly through domestic deposits which increased by 15.5% in 2023, but growth 
decelerated to some 3% in the first half of 2024. Non-performing loans made up 4.3% of 
total loans in mid-2024, down from 5.2% in mid-2022. Increasing net interest margins led to 
a surge in banking sector profits (+75.3%) in 2023.  
Credit activity continued to grow despite higher lending rates. Credit growth accelerated to 
10.8% in 2023, from 6.6% in the previous year and continued to expand in the first months of 
 
9 The central government is the majority or full owner of some 50 SOEs in Montenegro. (OECD 2024) 


===== PAGE 57 =====
 
56 
 
2024, mainly on the back of inter-bank lending and lending to households. Corporate sector 
loans recorded a slowdown in an environment of higher interest rates in 2023, but 
accelerated in May-July 2024. Borrowing costs increased in 2023 and remained high, with 
the nominal weighted averaged lending rate reaching 6.6% in July 2024 compared to 5.92% 
at the end of 2022.  
Functioning of the labour market 
The economic recovery led to strong job growth and a fall in unemployment, but structural 
challenges in the labour market remain. According to the labour force survey (LFS), the 
average unemployment rate declined to 13.4% in 2023 from 15.1% in 2022. The number of 
employed increased strongly, by 10.8%, and the rate of employment stood at 55.6%. The 
average gross wage increased by 
11.8%, driven by public sector wages. 
Regional disparities persisted in 2023, 
with the unemployment rate varying 
from 3.1% in the coastal region to 
10.1% in the centre and 31.9% in the 
poorer northern region. The gender 
gap narrowed, but the activity rate of 
women (66.3%) remained significantly 
below that of men (77%). Remaining 
major structural challenges are youth 
unemployment (those aged 15-24), 
which stood at 23.3% in 202310 and 
long-term unemployment: 72.1% of all the unemployed have been looking for a job for more 
than 12 months. Ongoing reform efforts, aimed at improving administrative capacities and 
the digitalisation of the Employment Agency, are expected to result in more targeted and 
effective employment activation measures. Reforming the Employment Agency is 
instrumental for both the implementation of the Youth Guarantee and a well-functioning 
labour market. 
2.3.2. The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the EU 
Education and innovation 
The latest PISA results confirmed significant gaps in education quality. The 2022 PISA11 
average scores were below the results in 2018, and below the OECD average. Skills 
mismatches persist for those with vocational education and training and those with a higher 
education qualification, despite existing efforts to improve the transition from education and 
training to the labour market.  
Albeit underfunded, public and private investment in research, development and innovation 
increased in 2023.12 The Innovation Fund continued to play a vital role in implementing the 
national innovation policy, through  eight innovation support programmes implemented in 
2023, aiming to encourage cooperation on developing innovative projects and products 
between private sector and research institutions. The links between academia, research 
institutes and business need to be further reinforced. Research staff are employed almost 
exclusively by the government or in the higher education sector. 
Physical capital and quality of infrastructure 
 
10 NEET rate declined to 20.3% in 2023 from 23.2 in 2022. 
11 Released in December 2023. 
12 In 2023, the government allocated nearly EUR 10 million to implement R&D activities, which represent a sharp 
increase compared to EUR 4.1 million in 2022. (OECD 2024) 


===== PAGE 58 =====
 
57 
 
Some progress was made in improving energy infrastructure. While the use of renewable 
energy sources is high, there is a lack of diversification in renewable sources (electricity 
production relies mainly on hydropower and biomass) and insufficient focus on 
environmental standards in energy infrastructure projects. In 2023, the national electric 
power company implemented two solar projects and some progress was made in preparing 
the construction of a new wind power plant. In August 2024, Montenegro adopted the Law 
on the use of energy from renewable sources, but the implementing legislation is missing. 
Montenegro has not yet taken a strategic decision on how to replace the thermal (lignite) 
power plant in Plevlja, which currently produces approximately 50% of Montenegro’s 
electricity and is vital for security of supply and the stability of the country’s power system, 
but remains its main polluter.  
Investment in digital infrastructure continued. After a series of large-scale cyberattacks on 
the state IT infrastructure in 2022, the government progressed with the digital 
transformation reforms. Cybersecurity was made a priority in 2023, through the 
establishment of an advanced cybersecurity defence ecosystem. After auctioning and 
awarding the 5G spectrum in 2022, all three operators continued to work on 5G activation in 
all municipalities by the end of 2024. At end of 2023, around 85.4% of the population of 
Montenegro was covered by the 5G network signal. Rural broadband development is 
however lagging behind, thereby widening the connectivity gap between urban and rural 
populations. 
Modernising the transport sector requires broad action and close partnership with the EU 
Progress on improving and modernising short sections of the road and rail networks was 
slow. Montenegro is yet to adjust its strategy for developing the transport sector in line with 
its Transport Community Treaty commitments on sustainable and smart mobility. Improving 
road transport connections, in particular the rail and road corridor linking the port of Bar to 
Boljare, at the border with Serbia, is a national priority for Montenegro. The government has 
reached an agreement with the EBRD and the EC for a favourable loan to continue 
construction on the Bar-Boljare highway, however rail corridor part (Bar-Vrbnica) faces 
significant delays, due to limited absorption and management capacity of the responsible 
administrative bodies. Montenegro did not engage with the European Commission on the 
latest investment planning projects until 2030, except for the Bar-Boljare corridor. A number 
of recently announced road development projects, such as a new inland route for the 
Adriatic-Ionian Highway, in addition to the previously planned coastal route expressway, 
depart significantly from the plans agreed under TEN-T network and the country’s Transport 
Community commitments and makes EU-funded feasibility and design studies partially 
obsolete.    
Sectoral and enterprise structure 
The structure of the economy remains broadly unchanged. Micro, small and medium-sized 
enterprises (MSMEs) accounted for 50.4% of total employees in 2023. Micro enterprises 
accounted for 95% of all MSMEs. Across sectors, the distribution of employment remained 
broadly stable in 2023, with the services sector absorbing 77% of total employment, while 
the shares of industry and construction (18.4%) and agriculture (4.5%) were much lower. The 
share of agriculture in gross value added declined to 5.9% in 2022, compared with an 
average of 7.4% in the previous 10 years, while the share of industry was roughly stable at 
some 10%. The share of construction fell to 3.8% in 2022, from its 10-year average of 5.1%. 
Economic integration with the EU and price competitiveness 
Growth of merchandise trade was supported by higher imports. Montenegro’s foreign trade 
expanded by 5.8% year on year, with exports of goods shrinking by 3.7%, and imports 
increasing by 7.8% in 2023. Bilateral trade with the EU grew by 12% and the EU remained 
Montenegro’s main trade partner, accounting for 36.1% and 45.8% of merchandise exports 


===== PAGE 59 =====
 
58 
 
and imports, respectively. The share of countries in the CEFTA (Central European Free Trade 
Agreement) accounted for 48.4% and 26% of Montenegro’s total exports and imports of 
goods. The EU also remains the main source of FDI inflows, accounting for 29.8% of total 
FDI inflows in 2023, followed by Russia, Türkiye and Serbia. Montenegro’s price 
competitiveness was negatively affected by the appreciation of the real effective exchange 
rate due to a positive inflation differential with the euro area.13 
 
 
2.4 PUBLIC PROCUREMENT, STATISTICS, FINANCIAL CONTROL  
Chapter 5 - Public procurement  
EU rules ensure that public procurement of goods, services and works in any Member State is 
transparent and open to all EU companies on the basis of non-discrimination and equal 
treatment. 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
The legal framework on public procurement is well aligned with the EU acquis.  
In December 2023, the World Bank Methodology for the Assessment of the Procurement 
System (MAPS) project ended with a comprehensive evaluation of the public procurement 
system in Montenegro, with a special focus on electronic public procurement. The results 
will serve as a basis for further improvements in the ﬁelds of contract management, 
introduction of green and sustainable public procurement and enhancement of the 
electronic public procurement system. In June 2024, secondary legislation was changed to 
reduce the number and value of negotiated procedures for which no contract notice is 
published.  
In April 2024, the government decided to continue with the second stage of the tender 
procedure for airports concession, with advisory support of the International Finance 
Corporation. 
Implementation and enforcement capacity  
The implementation and enforcement capacity in the area of public procurement is 
adequate and remains stable. Training sessions on public procurement rules and courses for 
procurement oﬃcers are organised systematically. A framework on integrity and conﬂict of 
interest in public procurement is in place. In January 2024, Montenegro introduced a 
monitoring mechanism for procurement procedures without a publication of the contract 
notice (simple procurements), aimed at preventing irregularities in these types of 
procedures.  
 
13 The IMF (2024) estimates the differential between the Montenegrin and euro area inflation narrowing to 1.7 
percentage points in early 2024. 
0
20
40
60
80
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Graph 6.5a: Montenegro - Exports of goods
EU
CEFTA
Other
Source: WiiW
% of GDP
0
20
40
60
80
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Graph 6.5b: Montenegro - Imports of goods
EU
CEFTA
Other
Source: WiiW
% of GDP


===== PAGE 60 =====
 
59 
 
Continuous improvements to the electronic public procurement system, implemented in 
2023-2024, facilitate the exchange of data between the public institutions and are aimed at 
detecting and limiting possible irregularities and corrupt practices in the public procurement. 
Improved functionalities of the system facilitate the monitoring of contract award and 
implementation and appeals.  
Eﬃcient remedy system 
Appeal procedures are in line with the EU standards and practice. At the end of 2023, a new 
president and members of the Commission for the Protection of Rights in Public 
Procurement Procedures were appointed, alleviating staff shortage issues. There are no 
signiﬁcant delays in treating and resolving complaints and the remedy system works 
eﬃciently. 
Chapter 18 - Statistics  
European statistics ae developed, produced and disseminated by EU Member States, guided by 
the principles and quality criteria elaborated in the Regulation on European statistics, such as 
professional independence, impartiality, reliability, transparency and conﬁdentiality. Common 
rules are in place for the methodology, production and dissemination of statistical information, 
which are further speciﬁed in sectoral legislation that constitute the EU acquis on statistics.  
The legal framework for statistical infrastructure remains broadly in line with the European 
standards and integrates the principles of the European Statistics Code of Practice. In 2024, 
the management structure of the Statistical Oﬃce of Montenegro (MONSTAT) was 
reinforced, but the number of employees remains at about 60% of the number of posts 
envisaged in the organisation chart. The lack of proper premises remains a serious issue, 
without any viable solution being implemented. In December 2023, the Development 
Strategy of Oﬃcial Statistics 2024-2028 and the Programme of Oﬃcial Statistics 2024-2028 
were adopted. 
On classiﬁcations and registers, Montenegro has to undertake the necessary preparations 
to introduce the new versions of the nomenclature of economic activities (NACE) and the 
classiﬁcation of products by activity (CPA), entering into force in 2025. As regards the 
nomenclature of territorial units for statistics (NUTS), the calculation, evaluation and 
agreement of some territorial typologies are still pending. In terms of business registers, 
94% of the mandatory variables are available, but overall compliance still needs to improve 
signiﬁcantly.  
In the area of macroeconomic statistics, and especially implementation of the European 
System of Accounts (ESA) 2010, Montenegro still needs to achieve signiﬁcant progress, 
both in terms of quality and completeness.  On quarterly and annual national accounts main 
aggregates, Montenegro extended the length of time series on several datasets, but it needs 
to continue its efforts to close remaining gaps, further improve time series and timeliness 
and remove ﬂags preventing publication of a large part of the data. Good progress was 
made towards regular production of supply, use and input-output tables, even though gaps 
remain. Only some limited preliminary government ﬁnance statistics (GFS) data were sent to 
Eurostat, while regular production is not in place. Therefore, signiﬁcant efforts are needed to 
start sending regular GFS data which can be published, as well as properly completed 
excessive deﬁcit procedure (EDP) tables.  
In the area of business and trade statistics, Montenegro  increased its compliance with 
short-term business statistics (STS) datasets, of which nine are now fully compliant. Data 
should be provided on sales volume in wholesale trade, and data on services producer prices 
are also missing.  For structural business statistics, Montenegro did not transmit data due to 
using the old format of transmission and is therefore invited to use the new format and 
transmit data for the relevant reference years. For business demography, no data is received, 


===== PAGE 61 =====
 
60 
 
and Montenegro is encouraged to prepare the data collection in the medium term. As 
regards trade by invoicing currency (TIC), the required data was transmitted for the ﬁrst time 
in the new required format. Equally, the new data transmission format was successfully 
implemented for international trade in services statistics (ITSS). For trade by enterprise 
characteristics (TEC), gaps remain, and no data was transmitted in 2023. Montenegro is 
therefore encouraged to step up efforts to transmit data for the most recent reference 
periods as soon as possible. 
In the area of social statistics, the enumeration phase of the census of population, 
households, and dwellings took place in December 2023 and data entering and processing 
was completed. The publication of census results is expected during 2024. In social 
protection statistics (ESSPROS), there is full compliance. In general, MONSTAT should 
improve the collection of sex disaggregated data.  
In the area of agriculture statistics, the Law on agricultural census was adopted on in July 
2024, and the census is to take place between  October and  December 2024. Improvements 
should be achieved in several agriculture-related areas, such as crop products statistics, 
where most of the data is marked as provisional since years. On the other hand, good efforts 
were made in organic farming statistics. 
In transport statistics, Montenegro used to provide good quality road freight transport data 
on a regular basis. However, there were delays in recent transmissions and some tables are 
not transmitted, for which reason the compliance has decreased. Energy statistics are highly 
compliant.  
Chapter 32 - Financial control 
The EU promotes the reform of national governance systems to improve managerial 
accountability, sound ﬁnancial management of income and expenditure, and external audit of 
public funds. The ﬁnancial control rules further protect the EU’s ﬁnancial interests against fraud 
in the management of EU funds and the euro against counterfeiting. 
Public internal ﬁnancial control (PIFC)  
Montenegro’s strategic framework for public internal ﬁnancial control (PIFC) is in place. The 
government has adopted annual reports on the implementation of relevant strategies and on 
governance and internal control in the public sector. Even though the development of 
managerial accountability in public administration is one of the key strategic objectives, its 
application remains limited, notably regarding the delegation of authority in the ﬁeld of 
ﬁnancial management and internal control. 
The legislative and operational framework for internal control and internal audit is in place.   
However, low implementation in various aspects of internal control indicates insuﬃcient 
understanding and non-appreciation of the system.   
In December 2023, a new methodology on internal reporting was adopted. However, many 
central government organisations bypass the parent ministries and submit their budget 
proposals directly to the Ministry of Finance. The centralised budget inspection within the 
Ministry of Finance started working and, in January 2024, published for the ﬁrst time its 
annual oversight plan with a list of institutions and processes it intends to tackle during the 
year. However, it needs to be substantially strengthened with appropriate human resources.   
Internal audit establishment and quality is improving, with consistent planning and reporting 
practices as well as internal quality assurance process. However, communication between 
internal auditors and senior management is limited, and frequently internal audit 
recommendations do not get implemented.  


===== PAGE 62 =====
 
61 
 
The Central Harmonisation Unit (CHU) made efforts to increase the functionality of the PIFC 
system, especially in the state-owned enterprises. The government endorsed the 
conclusions of CHU’s annual report, but their implementation needs strengthening. CHU and 
the Human Resources Management Authority established a well-functioning continuous 
development programme as well as a certiﬁcation programme for auditors.  
At the level of PIFC, an anti-corruption system exists.  All public entities are obliged to 
inform the CHU on suspicions of irregularities and fraud through the reporting system. CHU 
keeps the register on these cases and monitors the mitigation measures and actions 
undertaken. However, very few bodies have reported any irregularities.  
External audit 
Parliament appointed the ﬁfth member of the Senate in July 2024 (the position was vacant 
since January 2021) of the State Audit Institution (SAI), but it has still not appointed the 
President of SAI (the position is vacant since July 2022).  An assessment by the 
International Organisation of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI) concluded that the delay 
in these appointments represents an infringement to the SAI independence. While several 
SAI reports have been discussed in parliamentary committees during 2023, Parliament does 
not yet have an institutionalised follow-up system of audit ﬁndings and recommendations of 
the SAI. Public control hearings are not taking place.  
SAI adopted and implemented its annual audit plan based on risk assessment and on clearly 
stated criteria. SAI conducted the audit of the year end budget report and 24 other audits as 
well as three audits of the State-owned enterprises, representing a signiﬁcant increase 
compared to previous period. SAI also published 47 reports on the implementation of the 
audit recommendations.  
Protection of the EU’s ﬁnancial interests 
Amendments to the Criminal Code are yet to be adopted in order to further align with the EU 
acquis on ﬁght against fraud to the EU's ﬁnancial interests by means of criminal law. The 
preparation of a new national anti-fraud strategy 2024-2027 is at an early stage. The Anti-
Fraud Coordination Service (AFCOS) strengthened its knowledge and skills through EU-
funded training activities. 
Montenegro is cooperating with the European Anti-Fraud Oﬃce (OLAF). Twelve  cases of 
irregularities were reported in the Irregularity Management System in 2023, building a track 
record of reporting of irregularities. Montenegro should continue building a track record of 
cooperation on investigation involving EU funds. 
Protection of the Euro against counterfeiting 
Montenegro’s legislation on protecting the euro against counterfeiting is in line with the EU 
acquis. The Central Bank of Montenegro carried out activities in accordance with the 
European Central Bank (ECB) and the EU standards regulating the integrity of the euro and 
cash handling standards including trainings and exchange of information. 
  
3. 
GOOD NEIGHBOURLY RELATIONS AND REGIONAL COOPERATION  
Good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation form an essential part of Montenegro’s 
European integration process. They contribute to stability, reconciliation and a climate 
conducive to addressing open bilateral issues and the legacies of the past. 
Montenegro maintained its engagement in a number of regional cooperation initiatives, such 
as the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA), the Energy Community, the 
Transport Community, the South East European Cooperation Process (SEECP) and the 


===== PAGE 63 =====
 
62 
 
Regional Cooperation Council (RCC). Montenegro also actively participates in initiatives 
such as the Central European Initiative (CEI) and the Centre for Security Co-operation 
(RACVIAC). 
On 7 December 2023, Montenegro ended its 2023 chairmanship of the Central European 
Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA.  
The fourth annual EU-Western Balkans Summit took place in Brussels in December 2023, 
reaffirming the EU membership perspective of the Western Balkans and exploring measures 
aimed at further advancing gradual integration. 
Montenegro has actively engaged in the regional dimension of the Growth Plan for the 
Western Balkans, actively participating in both ministerial and leaders’ meetings, and it 
hosted the May leaders meeting in Kotor. 
On the Common Regional Market (CRM), in October 2023 the Berlin Process summit took 
place for the first time in the region, in Tirana, adopting an additional agreement on the 
recognition of professional qualifications, concerning nurses, veterinary surgeons, 
pharmacists, and midwives. The roadmap for roaming between the Western Balkans and the 
EU entered into the first phase of implementation. Montenegro has ratified all four mobility 
agreements and has deposited the related notification instruments. Twelve  major decisions 
were agreed by the CEFTA Joint Committee in October 2024. On the sidelines of the Berlin 
Process summit, Montenegro, Slovenia and France signed the agreement on establishing 
the Western Balkans Cyber Capacity Centre (WB3C), with headquarters in Podgorica.  
Montenegro continued to closely cooperate with Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and 
Serbia under the Sarajevo Declaration Process. By the end of November 2023, 681 refugee 
families were selected to benefit from the Regional Housing Programme. In 2024 a total 
of 646 refugee families benefited from this project, covering an estimated 2 000 individuals. 
The Commission on Missing Persons of Montenegro continued cooperating with 
neighbouring countries under bilateral cooperation protocols. There are 51 active cases of 
missing persons who are Montenegrin citizens or whose families reside in Montenegro. 
Montenegro generally maintains good bilateral relations with other enlargement countries in 
the region and with neighbouring EU Member States. 
Relations with Albania remained good, with occasional high-level bilateral visits and 
consultations. and continued work on improving bilateral cooperation in fields of mutual 
interest.  
Relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina remained good overall. The agreed border 
demarcation is yet to be physically marked. Political tensions in Montenegro were sparked 
by a visit by the leader of the Republika Srpska entity in February 2024 and the UN Resolution 
on Srebrenica. 
Relations with Kosovo remained good, with several ministerial level consultations, 
confirming the common European and Euro-Atlantic perspective, however with occasional 
inter-party tensions within the parliamentary majority, specifically regarding the admission of 
Kosovo to the Council of Europe. The coalition agreement includes support for Kosovo’s 
independence and sovereignty.  
Relations with North Macedonia remained good with no pending bilateral issues. High-level 
meetings between representatives of both countries took place during the reporting period, 
including in the context of the Western Balkans heads of states meeting and the NATO 
Secretary General meeting with the heads of states from the region in Skopje. 
Relations with Serbia are generally stable, albeit with occasional mutual accusations. High-
level visits took place and cooperation agreements were signed between the two countries. 


===== PAGE 64 =====
 
63 
 
After a long delay, diplomatic relations were restored. A new Serbian Ambassador to 
Montenegro was accredited in February 2024, whereas the appointment of an Ambassador 
to Serbia is still pending. 
Bilateral relations with Türkiye remained stable, with stated intentions to further develop 
bilateral cooperation. Montenegro’s Parliament Speaker paid an official visit to Türkiye in 
December 2023. Following the government reshuffle, the newly appointed Minister of 
Foreign Affairs visited Türkiye as his first official visit abroad. 
Montenegro continued to provide unequivocal support to Ukraine in light of Russia’s war of 
aggression including humanitarian and military aid. In February 2024, the President 
participated in the Ukraine – South-East Europe Summit in Tirana. 
Relations with the Republic of Moldova are good overall. The Presidents of Montenegro and 
Moldova met on the margins of the European Political Community in Chisinau in June 2023 
and at the Ukraine – South East Europe Summit in Tirana in February 2024. Montenegro and 
Moldova also maintain relations through the South-East European Cooperation Process 
(SEECP).  
Relations with Georgia are generally friendly. In October 2023, the Prime Minister attended 
the Silk Road Forum held in Tbilisi. 
Despite regular bilateral meetings, relations with Croatia have been souring, with tensions 
arising from pending bilateral issues among other things. There was no progress regarding 
the pending border demarcation between the two countries or the ownership of the “Jadran” 
vessel. The Montenegrin Parliament adoption in June of a resolution focusing on the 
historical events of Jasenovac, Mauthausen and Dachau sparked a strong diplomatic 
reaction from Croatia, including three top Montenegrin officials being declared personae non 
gratae.  
Relations with Italy remained good. In September 2023, the President paid an official visit to 
Italy, and several cooperation protocols were signed.  
 
4. ABILITY TO ASSUME THE OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP 
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET 
This cluster covers: free movement of goods (Chapter 1); freedom of movement for workers 
(Chapter 2); right of establishment and freedom to provide services (Chapter 3); free 
movement of capital (Chapter 4); company law (Chapter 6); intellectual property law 
(Chapter 7); competition policy (Chapter 8); financial services (Chapter 9) and consumer and 
health protection (Chapter 28).  
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods  
The free movement of goods ensures that many products can be traded freely across the EU 
based on common rules and procedures. Where products are governed by national rules, the 
principle of the free movement of goods prevents these rules from creating unjustified barriers 
to trade. 
General principles 
In April 2024, Montenegro adopted its EU accession programme 2024-2027, which includes 
planning for legislative alignment on free movement of goods.  
Non-harmonised areas 


===== PAGE 65 =====
 
64 
 
Montenegro continued to implement its action plan for compliance with Articles 34-36 of the 
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) on the prohibition of quantitative 
restrictions.   
Harmonised area: quality infrastructure  
On standardisation, the Institute for Standardisation of Montenegro (ISME) is continuing to 
address the recommendations of the European Committee for Standardisation (CEN) and 
the European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardisation (CENELEC) ensure its full 
membership of these bodies. From June 2023 until June 2024, ISME published 2 486 
Montenegrin standards aligned with EU standards.   
On metrology, Montenegro’s Bureau of Metrology is a full member of the International 
Organization of Legal Metrology since January 2023. Improvements were made to the 
capacity of the laboratories for temperature and pressure and for testing precious metal 
articles. 
The Accreditation Body of Montenegro (ATCG) accredited 42 conformity assessment 
bodies and terminated four accredited conformity assessment bodies. In December 2023, 
the European co-operation for Accreditation (EA) signed a multilateral agreement putting 
ATCG on an equivalent position to that of national accreditation bodies of the EU Member 
States. 
Montenegro is yet to align to the latest EU acquis on market surveillance.  1 278 market 
surveillance inspections were ensured, which identified 618 dangerous and non-compliant 
products (32 258 items). New market surveillance inspectors were hired.  
Harmonised area: sectoral legislation 
Regarding ‘new and global approach product legislation’, Montenegro adopted 
implementing legislation on medicines for human and veterinary use, medical devices, and 
construction products, designed to ensure partial alignment with the EU acquis.  
On ‘old approach product legislation’, Montenegro adopted implementing legislation, 
designed to ensure high level of alignment with the EU acquis on chemicals, notably certain 
annexes and an implementing regulation of the EU Regulations on Registration, Evaluation, 
Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) and Classification, Labelling and 
Packaging (CLP).  
On procedural measures, there were no new developments to report.   
On anti-corruption measures under this chapter, the integrity plan of the Administration for 
Inspection Affairs (covering market surveillance) is in place.  
Chapter 2 - Freedom of movement for workers  
Citizens of one Member State have the right to work in another Member State and must be 
given the same working and social conditions as other workers. 
There were no legislative developments concerning access to the labour market. In 2023, a 
total of 38 943 permits for temporary residence and work were issued, 32.83% more than in 
2022. The government set at 28 988 the annual number of permits for temporary residence 
and work of foreigners in 2024.  
Montenegro is preparing to join the European network of employment services (EURES) 
upon accession to the EU and developed a practical guide for the Agency to improve labour 
force mobility and a roadmap to join the EURES portal. Training was provided to Agency 
staff. Business and IT solutions to fulfil requirements for EURES Interoperability are being 
developed.  


===== PAGE 66 =====
 
65 
 
Montenegro has 24 bilateral agreements in force for the coordination of social security 
systems, of which 16 are with the EU Member States. Further effort is required to ratify the 
agreement on social insurance with Albania , to sign a draft agreement with Bosnia and 
Herzegovina and to strengthen administrative capacity.  
The European Health Insurance Card (EHIC) is recognised under the Law on compulsory 
health insurance but will only be introduced after EU accession. No new agreement on the 
use of the card was signed with EU Member States. In line with the 2023 Health Insurance 
Fund staffing plan, three executors were hired for the positions of senior adviser for 
international health insurance. 
Chapter 3 - Right of establishment and freedom to provide services  
EU natural and legal persons have the right to establish themselves in any Member State and to 
provide cross-border services. For certain regulated professions, there are rules on mutual 
recognition of qualifications. EU rules on postal services focus on improving the quality of 
universal service, gradual market opening to competition, and the establishment of an 
independent regulator. 
On the right of establishment and freedom to provide cross-border services, the horizontal 
law on services needs to be amended to ensure full compliance with the EU Services 
Directive. Sectoral legislative alignment with the EU Services Directive continued, namely 
through the adoption of the Law on Waste Management in April 2024. Efforts however 
should step up to increase sectoral legislative alignment. In July 2024, the Point of Single 
Contact for services portal was established and is operational. Activities on electronic 
company registration continued as part of the ongoing efforts to increase number of e-
services in state administration.  
On postal services, the national legislation is aligned with the EU postal acquis, including the 
Postal Services Directive and the Regulation on cross-border parcel delivery services. There 
is one universal service provider and 23 other postal operators. In October 2023, the 
government adopted the final report on the implementation of the Strategy for the 
development of postal services 2019-2023. In December 2023, the government adopted the 
new strategy for the Development of the Postal Services 2024-2028 and its action plan for 
2024-2025. Montenegro should continue monitoring  and ensuring compliance with  the 
established postal market rules. 
On mutual recognition of professional qualifications, Montenegro should continue its 
alignment with the acquis. In December 2023, Parliament adopted the Law on confirmation 
of the agreement on the recognition of professional qualifications for doctors of medicine, 
dentists and architects under the Common European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) signed 
within the framework of the Berlin Process. It entered into force in February 2024 and the 
Montenegrin institutions have 18 months to align sectoral legislation with this agreement. 
Additionally, in December 2023, Parliament adopted the Law on confirmation of the 
agreement on the recognition of professional qualification of the general care nurses, 
doctors of veterinary medicine, pharmacists and midwives under CEFTA. This agreement is 
yet to enter into force for Montenegro. Efforts to align with the Proportionality Test Directive 
and the minimum training requirements of all sectoral professions need to accelerate.  
Chapter 4 - Free movement of capital  
In the EU, capital and investments must be able to move without restriction, with common rules 
for cross-border payments. Banks and other economic operators apply certain rules to support 
the fight against money laundering and terrorist financing. 


===== PAGE 67 =====
 
66 
 
There were no developments in the area of capital movements . Montenegro has yet to 
implement its obligations under the Stabilisation and Association Agreement as regards 
amending the Law on ownership rights, removing preferential treatments and ensuring that 
EU nationals can buy real estate or farming land under the same conditions as Montenegro 
nationals. 
In the area of payment systems, the legal framework on payment systems was further 
aligned with the EU acquis . The Law on interchange fees and business rules concerning 
payment cards came into force. Subsequently, the Central Bank of Montenegro adopted 
implementing legislation on payment systems as well as the Decision on the method and 
time limits for submitting data on interchange fees. 
The Central Bank continued to check the compliance of operations with the regulations in 
the field of payment transactions. The Central Bank has completed the implementation and 
system-wide thematic control of payment service providers’ business compliance with 
certain provisions of the Law on payment transactions, imposed appropriate measures on 
six banks, as a result of which it initiated five misdemeanour proceedings and carried out 
two targeted extraordinary controls and four regular controls of payment service providers 
(banks). In July 2024 Montenegro submitted its formal application to join the Single Euro 
Payments Area (SEPA). 
In the area of fight against money laundering and terrorism financing, Montenegro made 
some progress aiming to align with the acquis on the prevention of money laundering and 
terrorism financing, as well as international instruments. The new Law on prevention of 
money laundering and financing of terrorism was adopted, aiming to further align the legal 
framework with relevant EU directives and to comply with the Financial Action Task Force’s 
(FATF) recommendations . Amendments were also adopted to the Law on games of chance. 
Further efforts are needed to fully meet FATF recommendations. 
The Central Bank continued to carry out regular controls of business compliance with 
regulations in the field of preventing money laundering and terrorist financing. During 2023, 
the Central Bank imposed five measures and two misdemeanour proceedings against two 
banks were initiated before the Court for Misdemeanours. In 2023, five controls were carried 
out in connection with the verification of the execution of the imposed supervisory 
measures. 
During 2023, the Capital Market Authority (CMA) carried out 12 direct controls of investment 
companies and companies for the management of investment funds. The CMA took 
adequate measures within its powers to eliminate irregularities and remedy non-compliance.  
Chapter 6 - Company law  
The EU has common rules on the formation, registration and disclosure requirements of a 
company, with complementary rules for accounting and financial reporting, and statutory audit. 
In the area of company law, Montenegro is preparing a new company law and a law on 
business organisations to further align national legislation with the EU acquis in this area.  
Montenegro needs to align with the directives on certain aspects of company law (Directive 
2017/1132) on the use of digital tools and processes (Directive 2019/1151), on cross-border 
conversions, mergers and divisions (Directive 2019/2121), on gender balance among 
directors of listed companies (Directive 2022/2381) and on the encouragement of long-term 
shareholder engagement (‘SRD II’ Directive). No progress was registered on the finalisation 
of the  revision of the Corporate Governance Code. Montenegro should ensure that the 
national business register is  technically ready to interconnect with the Business Registers 
Interconnection System (BRIS). 
In the area of company reporting, legislative work to achieve full alignment with the EU 


===== PAGE 68 =====
 
67 
 
acquis on transparency requirements for listed companies is ongoing through the Law on 
Amendments to the Law on Capital Market.  Concerning accounting, it is important that 
Montenegro completes its alignment with the accounting directive concerning financial 
reporting regime for micro and small companies, and dividend distribution. The World Bank 
is currently conducting an assessment of financial reporting on the observance of standards 
and codes concerning accounting and auditing ('ROSC').  
The capacity of both the Department for Audit Oversight with two quality assurance 
inspectors and the Department for Accounting with two employees is operational, but needs 
to be further strengthened in the coming period. 
Chapter 7 - Intellectual property law  
The EU has to a large extent harmonised rules for the legal protection and enforcement of 
intellectual property rights (IPR), covering notably patents, trade mark and designs, 
biotechnological inventions and pharmaceuticals, trade secrets, (craft and industrial) 
geographical indications, supplementary protection certiﬁcates, copyright and related rights.  
Montenegro made significant progress on copyright and related rights. In May 2024 
Parliament adopted the Law on Amendments to the Law on copyright and related rights, to 
align national  legislation with (i) the Directive on certain permitted uses of works and other 
subject matter protected by copyright and related rights for the benefit of persons who are 
blind, visually impaired or otherwise print-disabled, and (ii) the Directive on the coordination 
of certain rules concerning copyright and rights related to copyright applicable to satellite 
broadcasting and cable retransmission. Furthermore, in October 2024, Montenegro adopted 
further amendments to the Law on copyright and related rights to align with the Directive on 
the exercise of copyright and related rights applicable to certain online transmissions of 
broadcasting organisations and retransmissions of television and radio programmes, 
(SatCab II); and the Directive on copyright and related rights in the Digital Single Market. 
On industrial property rights, in May 2024 Parliament adopted the Law on ratification of the 
Geneva Act of the Lisbon Agreement on Appellations of Origin and Geographical Indications, 
which reinforces cultural contributions and reward the creativity of authentic know-how. 
On enforcement, in December 2023, a guide for enforcement of intellectual property rights 
and an improved reporting methodology were adopted. A number, but not all, of activities in 
the 2023 action plan were completed, including to strengthen administrative capacities, IT 
tools and databases and to raise public awareness. In May 2024, the government adopted 
the action plan for the implementation of intellectual property strategy for 2024. In October 
2024, the Parliament finalised the legislative alignment with the enforcement Directive by 
adopting the necessary amendments through the Law on copyright and related rights.  
The performance of the Market Inspectorate and Customs Administration notably improved 
and the number of misdemeanour orders increased as did the value of fines and the number 
of items confiscated by the Customs Authority. Joint actions of the authorities responsible 
for protection of intellectual property rights took place in July and November 2023. It is 
important to step up efforts in securing disposal facilities for seized goods and 
strengthening joint actions with the Police Administration. In August 2024 the government 
adopted the decision on disassembling the Administration of Inspection Affairs, effective as 
of 1 October 2024. In that regard, Montenegro is to ensure transitional provisions and 
continuity of operations of market inspectors and inspection regarding intellectual property 
rights by swift implementation of the new personnel plan and job systematisation of the 
Ministry of Economic Development, to which they will be attached. 
In October 2023, Montenegro amended the Decree on detailed implementation of customs 
procedures and customs formalities to improve the handling by customs authorities of 


===== PAGE 69 =====
 
68 
 
goods for which there is a reasonable suspicion that they infringe intellectual property 
rights. This decree includes all provisions of the relevant EU regulations governing the 
actions of the customs authority for the protection of intellectual property rights at the 
border.  
Montenegro Intellectual Property Office has signed with the European Union Intellectual 
Property Office an MoU, which mainly focuses on convergency of common practices, 
technical and operational support with harmonisation of acquis and examination guidelines, 
as well as integration into EUIPO data bases and networks. 
Chapter 8 - Competition policy  
EU rules protect free competition. They include antitrust rules against restrictive agreements 
between companies and abuse of a dominant position, and rules on concentrations between 
companies which would significantly impede effective competition. EU rules also set out a 
system of State aid control. Governments are only allowed to grant State aid if restrictive 
conditions are met, with a view to preventing distortion of competition. 
Antitrust and mergers 
The legislative framework is broadly aligned with the EU acquis and the Stabilisation and 
Association Agreement.  Limited cooperation with the Court and regulators is hampering the 
performance of the Agency for Protection of the Competition (APC). Montenegro should 
finalise and adopt without further delay the Action Plan, with realistic timelines, for achieving 
the closing benchmarks in Chapter 8.  
As regards the institutional framework, the management structure was further improved 
through the appointment of an acting Deputy Director in October 2023. The organisational 
structure, however, requires further modifications and additional personnel to function 
properly. 
In the area of enforcement capacity, the APC’s operational and financial capacity needs to 
be strengthened. 
As regards implementation, in December 2023, the APC adopted a decision regarding the 
prohibition of cartel practices. This is a significant development considering that in the past 
8 years there were no procedures initiated and no decisions taken regarding potential abuse 
of a dominant position. The APC is still committed to issue decisions on individual 
exemptions, a category that is obsolete in the EU but still present in the Montenegrin 
Competition Act 
State aid 
The legislative framework is mostly in line with the EU acquis. Montenegro adopted 
secondary legislation on State aid rules. The 2018 Law on State aid control sets out the 
notion of aid as well as procedural State aid rules but further alignment with the EU acquis is 
needed.  
On implementation, the APC adopted 40 decisions and opinions in ex ante and ex post 
procedures. The APC started to deal with cases in the energy sector.  
The APC continues ongoing investigations, including on whether the agreement concluded 
between the National Tourist Organisation of Montenegro and Montenegro Airlines was a 
basis for granting illegal State aid. The APC also continued examining financial support for 
To Montenegro and the Bar-Boljare highway cases. In September 2023, the APC initiated an 
examination procedure concerning a purchase made by Elektroprivreda Crne Gore EPCG. 
The APC issued an opinion on the state guarantee for the loan to the Montenegrin Electric 
Transmission System (CGES) for financing electricity transmission system infrastructure 


===== PAGE 70 =====
 
69 
 
with funding by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). There are 
no final outcomes from the ongoing State aid investigations, including for the recovery of 
potentially illegal aid regarding Montenegro airlines. 
The APC conducted outreach activities and awareness raising in the field of State aid 
addressed to aid grantors and judges. The cooperation between APC and State aid grantors 
from public administration at central and local level intensified; yet public administration 
guidelines on State aid, to ensure that there is systematic consultation of the APC when new 
policies with potential impact on competition or qualifying as State aid are being designed, 
are still missing.  
The APC regularly participates in legislative processes to ensure the compliance of new 
legislation with State aid rules. 
Liberalisation 
There are no significant developments in this area. 
Chapter 9 - Financial services  
EU rules aim to ensure fair competition among, and the stability of, financial institutions, 
namely banking, insurance, supplementary pensions, investment services and securities 
markets. They include rules on authorisation, operation and supervision of these institutions.   
On banks and financial conglomerates, work continued on further implementation and 
alignment of the banking legislation with acquis, notably in the areas of capital requirements 
and recovery and resolution of credit institutions, with several secondary legislation acts 
adopted by the central bank.  
There were no relevant developments in the area of insurances and occupational pensions. 
Work continued on alignment with Solvency II Directive, Insurance Distribution Directive and 
accompanying secondary legislation. 
Regarding financial market infrastructure, there were no relevant developments.  
On securities markets and investment services, there were no relevant developments. Work 
continued on alignment with the Directive on Alternative Investment Fund Managers and the 
Directive on undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities.  
They were no relevant developments in the area of sustainable and digital finance. 
Alignment with two Regulations in this area should be achieved upon the EU accession. In 
2024, the Central Bank of Montenegro joined the Sustainable Banking and Finance Network, 
a global platform on sustainable finance for regulators, coordinated by the World Bank 
Group. 
Chapter 28 - Consumer and health protection 
EU rules protect consumers’ economic interests and also ensure product safety, prevent 
dangerous imitations, and establish liability for defective products. The EU also ensures high 
common standards for tobacco control, blood, tissues, cells and organs, and medicines for 
human and veterinary use. The EU also has rules for upholding patients’ rights in cross-border 
healthcare and in preparing for and responding to cross-border health threats, including 
communicable diseases. 
Consumer protection 
On horizontal aspects, Montenegro continued to implement the recommendations of the EU 
peer review on consumer protection, including training and capacity building. The 
composition of the Consumer Protection Council was expanded, and remuneration for 
participation in this body was introduced to encourage the members to further engage in the 


===== PAGE 71 =====
 
70 
 
work of the Council. The low level of activity by local governments on consumer protection 
remains a persistent challenge. Montenegro’s Law on Consumer Protection is yet to be 
further aligned with the EU acquis. 
Concerning enforcement and redress, the composition of the Committee for out-of-court 
settlement  of consumer disputes was improved. In early 2024, the High Court of Podgorica 
confirmed that a processing fee for loans as percentage of the approved loan amount was 
declared unlawful, following a collective proceeding initiated by a consumer organisation. It 
demonstrates the readiness of the Montenegrin judiciary to interpret legislation in line with 
EU acquis and judgments of the CJEU. A total of 596 complaints were registered in the 
central consumer information system, with more than 96% resolved, of which more than 58% 
were fully or partially in favour of the consumer. As for the complaints that could not be 
resolved, the consumer was informed that they can exercise their rights in court / out-of-
court proceedings. Controls by the Central Bank of Montenegro led to warning measures to 
creditors whose level of consumer protection was determined to be unsatisfactory. 
Montenegro is yet to complete its planned reorganisation of the inspection services and to 
establish a coordination body for the harmonisation and monitoring of inspection 
supervision. It also needs to align its legislation with the EU acquis on representative 
actions.  
On product safety, national legislation was aligned with the EU acquis on the Safety Gate 
Rapid Alert system for dangerous non-food consumer products (See also Chapter 1 on 
market surveillance). However, Montenegro is yet to further align its legislation with the EU 
acquis on general product safety.   
Public health  
On public health, in October 2023 the 2023-2027 healthcare development strategy and its 
2023-2024 action plan were adopted. Health accounts for 12.5% of the total 2024 state 
budget (compared to 14% in 2023). In January 2024, Montenegro signed an association 
agreement to join the EU4Health programme. Regarding eHealth, in July 2023 a new IT 
system of the Clinical Centre of Montenegro (which provides two thirds of all medical 
services in Montenegro) was put into operation to improve the accessibility and quality of 
healthcare services to patients. However, the system is not fully functional and certain 
aspects cause challenges for both doctors and patients. Following the call for interest to 
join the Critical Medicines Alliance, one entity from Montenegro is now participant.   
There were no developments to report on tobacco control.  
On communicable diseases, Montenegro adopted implementing legislation designed to 
further align to the EU acquis. The level of immunisation of children with the measles, 
mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccines has declined. Progress was made on the construction 
of the new infectious diseases centre.  
There were no developments to report on blood, tissues, cells and organs nor patients’ 
rights in cross-border health care.  
On preventive measures, a new clinic for mental health is being built and is expected to 
provide comprehensive treatments to both adults and children in respective psychiatric 
departments.  
There were no developments to report on nutrition and physical activity, on alcohol-related 
harm reduction or on drug abuse prevention and harm reduction. 
On health inequalities, there were no developments to report. 
On corruption, several public opinion surveys and reports by CSOs report that many citizens 
are not satisfied with the public healthcare system, citing corruption as one of the most 


===== PAGE 72 =====
 
71 
 
common challenges.   
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH  
This cluster covers: digital transformation and media (Chapter 10); taxation (Chapter 16); 
economic and monetary policy (Chapter 17); social policy and employment (Chapter 19); 
industrial policy (Chapter 20); science and research (Chapter 25); education and culture 
(Chapter 26); and customs union (Chapter 29). 
Chapter 10 - Digital transformation and media  
The EU supports the smooth functioning of the internal market for electronic communications, 
electronic commerce and audiovisual services. The rules protect consumers and support the 
universal availability of modern services. 
Significant progress was made regarding electronic communications. In October 2024, the 
Parliament 
adopted 
national 
legislation 
aligning 
with 
the 
European 
Electronics 
Communication Code. Through this Law, Montenegro brought its legislation in line with the 
EU acquis as regards the provisions on the independence of the national regulatory authority 
for electronic communications i.e. the Agency for Electronic Communications and Postal 
Services (EKIP). The government should adopt the National Plan for the development of 
broadband infrastructure and work towards alignment with the Gigabit Infrastructure Act. 
New Council members of EKIP were appointed in April 2024. This has enabled the regulator 
to resume its normal functions: an important step for Montenegro in building up a track 
record ensuring the independence of the media and telecommunications regulators.  
Regarding digital trust and cybersecurity, Montenegro has strengthened its cybersecurity 
infrastructure, improved the capacities of the government’s Computer Incident Response 
Team, and established an online portal to raise awareness of cybersecurity issues. 
Montenegro formally committed to achieve full alignment of national legislation with the 
Network and Information Security Directive (NIS 2) by December 2024 and the Open Data 
Directive by December 2026 and to establish a Cybersecurity Agency and meet cybersecurity 
requirements for critical infrastructure. Montenegro is not yet aligned with the e-Privacy 
Directive and needs to continue the implementation of the 5G Cybersecurity Toolbox 
measures, including assessing the risk profile of suppliers and putting in place appropriate 
restrictions and/or exclusions for high-risk suppliers. Regarding electronic identification and 
trust services, Montenegro is encouraged to swiftly align its national legislation with the new 
EU Digital Identity and Trust Services framework. 
Concerning digital services, alignment with the Digital Services Acts (DSA) and Digital 
Markets Act (DMA) needs to be stepped up to provide predictability for business.  
The Ministry of Public Administration (MPA) continued implementing the National System 
for Electronic Collection and Control of Collection of Administrative Fees (NS NAT) project 
to facilitate the process of paying state fees and services. Montenegro started implementing 
activities related to public calls under the Digital Europe Programme. 
Concerning media, in June 2024, Parliament adopted the Law on audiovisual media services, 
the amendments to the Law on media, and the Law on the national public broadcaster 
following consultations with the Commission. This paved the way for the reactivation of 
Montenegro’s participation in the media and cultural strands of Creative Europe Programme 
in July 2024. The Regulatory Agency for Electronic Media (AEM) which became the Agency 
for Audiovisual Media Services (AMU), was accorded the authority to effectively monitor and 
impose fines in case of violations of the law. The AMU has taken steps to  strengthen its 
operational capacity in order to  use its newly acquired powers to effectively monitor  the 
functioning of the audiovisual market and promote media literacy.  


===== PAGE 73 =====
 
72 
 
Chapter 16 - Taxation  
EU rules on taxation cover value-added tax, excise duties and aspects of corporate taxation. 
They also cover cooperation between tax administrations, including the exchange of 
information to prevent tax evasion. 
In the area of indirect taxation, VAT related implementing legislation was adopted.  
Excise taxation is partially aligned with the EU acquis. Minimum excise duty rates for alcohol 
and alcoholic beverages mostly comply with the EU law (except beer). Amendments to the 
Law on excise taxes introduced excise duty calendar for cigarettes to ensure full compliance 
with the EU minimum requirements by 1 January 2025 and aligned the excise duty applied to 
other manufactured tobacco to the EU acquis. Further alignment is needed with the general 
rules for the production, keeping, storage, movement, and controls on products that are 
subject to excise duties according to the EU acquis. 
In the area of direct taxation, amendments to the Law on corporate income tax aligned the 
legislation further with the EU acquis, by introducing a special tax status for certain 
transactions between income taxpayers and non-resident legal entities, modifying taxation 
applicable to mergers, divisions and transfers of assets and exchanges of shares 
concerning companies of different Member States, as well as transfers of the headquarters 
of European companies from one Member State to another.  
The EU cooperates with Montenegro through an enhanced dialogue on tax good governance 
within the framework of the EU list of non-cooperative jurisdisctions for tax purposes. 
On administrative cooperation and mutual assistance, in December 2023, the OECD 
conducted a peer review in the area of exchange of information on request, but the report is 
not yet issued. Work continued to procure software for the automatic exchange of 
information.  
As concerns the operational capacity and computerisation, the Revenue and Customs 
Administration was separated into two separate bodies in January 2024 and the Tax 
Administration was created. The tax inspection and VAT refunds were centralised in 2023 
based on recommendations of the IMF. Work continued to implement the integrated 
information system which paved the way for future interconnectivity with the EU IT systems 
on VAT and excise as well as tax cooperation and exchange of information.  
On anti-corruption measures, joint inspection controls were carried out by the Tax 
Inspectorate, the Police Administration and the Prosecutor’s Office to detect tax fraud and 
evasion, resulting in criminal reports.   
Chapter 17 - Economic and monetary policy  
EU rules require the independence of central banks and prohibit them from directly financing 
the public sector. Member States coordinate their economic policies and are subject to fiscal, 
economic and financial surveillance. 
Montenegro does not have standard monetary policy tools at its disposal, as it uses the 
euro  as legal tender, leaving fiscal policy as the main macroeconomic policy instrument. 
Montenegro’s use of the euro is based on a decision that the authorities made under 
exceptional circumstances and is fully distinct from membership of the euro area. A new 
Governor was appointed at end-2023, further challenge relates to codifying the selection 
procedures for Vice-Governors which would be transparent, focused on candidates’ 
technical competence, and free from political influence. 
In December 2023, following the action plan for alignment with the EU acquis, Montenegro 
adopted amendments to the Law on the Central Bank of Montenegro (CBM) aimed at 


===== PAGE 74 =====
 
73 
 
strengthening its functional, institutional, personal and financial independence.  
In the area of economic policy, there were no significant progress in terms of alignment with 
Council Directive on requirements for budgetary frameworks of the Member States, or 
introduction of European System of Accounts (ESA 2010) standards. . Ministry of Finance, 
Central Bank of Montenegro and Monstat should undertake concrete efforts to ensure 
practical cooperation and to develop the appropriate capacity to produce government 
finance statistics and fiscal notifications in line with the EU acquis. 
The government adopted and submitted its 2024-2026 Economic Reform Programme on 
12 January 2024. The programme integrates macroeconomic, fiscal and structural reform 
plans into a single strategic document. Core reforms under the ERP continue from the 
previous programme and are in line with key reforms presented in the Reform Agenda.   In 
September 2024 the government adopted a medium-term fiscal consolidation strategy . The 
implementation of the policy guidance set out in the conclusions of the Economic and 
Financial Dialogue of May 2023 has been partial. 
Chapter 19 - Social policy and employment  
EU rules in the social field include minimum standards for labour law, equality, health and 
safety at work and non-discrimination. They also promote social inclusion and social 
protection, and social dialogue at EU level. 
Concerning the Law on Labour, amendments are under preparation, including the 
transposition of the Directive on work-life balance for parents and carers and repealing 
Directive on transparent and predictable working conditions as well as with the EU 
Framework Agreement on Telework. 
The enforcement of the Labour Law remains weak and inspection services understaffed. 
The appointment of inspectors for a certain period is not in accordance with Art. 6 of the ILO 
Labour Inspection Convention No. 81. 
Between 15 June 2023 and 1 April 2024, the labour inspectorate carried out 5 149 
inspections (3 478 regular and 1 671 per initiative) and 2 306 irregularities were identified. 
Most irregularities concerned work without an employment contract and a declaration to 
compulsory social security cover, as well as provisions concerning working time. 
The annual action plan for Health and Safety at Work 2024 was adopted in May 2024.   
Monitoring and enforcement mechanisms of the Law on Occupational Safety and Health 
(OSH) as well as data availability, accuracy and analysis are weak. There is no supervision of 
licensed OSH coordinators in place. SMEs face challenges in implementing comprehensive 
OSH measures due to resource constraints and a lack of awareness. The OSH inspectorate 
carried out 267 inspections. 419 irregularities were identified, 397 were remedied. One death 
(in the construction sector) and two serious injuries (one in the construction sector and one 
in the woodworking industry) were reported. 
Concerning social dialogue, a number of branch collective agreements have been concluded 
or amended. Collective bargaining primarily occurs at the sector and national level, with 
agreements primarily regulating employees’ salaries and working hours. Some important 
sectors remain without collective agreements, such as the banking sector or the media.  
The tripartite Social Council met three times. The working group within the Social Council 
dealing with occupational health and safety is not functional. The involvement and impact of 
social partners in relevant policy making processes remains weak. The Law on Strikes and 
the Labour Law lack coherence concerning minimum work processes. Following the 
creation of a Directorate for Social Dialogue under the new Ministry of Labor, Employment 


===== PAGE 75 =====
 
74 
 
and Social Dialogue the enhancement of capacity building of social partners and efforts to 
strengthen social dialogue need to continue. 
Regarding labour force participation and unemployment rate see the statistical annex and 
the section on the functioning of the labour market under 2.3 Economic criteria. 
As concerns employment policy, the Annual Action Plan for 2024 under the National 
Employment Strategy was adopted in early 2024. While at the level of strategies equal 
opportunity and the inclusion of vulnerable groups is well targeted, their employment rates 
remain limited. The implementation of Active Labour Market Measures by the Employment 
Agency lacks flexibility and is underfunded. The level of informal employment remained 
high, estimated to constitute 26-31% of national GDP. This is addressed in the Programme 
for Suppressing of informal economy (2024-2026) the government adopted at the end of 
2023. 
The Employment Agency continued implementing an ambitious digitalisation process. It is 
planned to be in place by the end of 2024. A revised Youth Guarantee Implementation Plan 
for 2024-2026 was adopted in July 2024, but a reform of the graduate programme and a 
strengthening of the capacities of the Employment Agency are crucial for its effective 
implementation.  
MONSTAT produces labour strategic documents to ensure equal opportunities and inclusion 
for vulnerable groups (Roma and Egyptian minorities and persons with disabilities). The 
National employment strategy (2021-2025) and the National strategy for gender equality 
(2021-2025) aim at increasing the employment of women. 
Concerning social protection and social inclusion, the risk of poverty rate in Montenegro is 
20.3% with children being the most exposed compared to other age groups. Income 
inequality persists, with the Northern region at a higher risk of poverty. 40.4% of children are 
‘at the risk of poverty or social exclusion’ as per the at risk of poverty or social exclusion 
(AROPE) indicator, down from 45.5% in 2022.  
The policy framework for social and child protection is outdated and the adoption of the 
social protection reform is delayed facing challenges it terms of sequencing, costing of 
measures. A new social and child protection strategy has been prepared and is pending 
adoption. A serious lack of child, family and victim support services persists. Social 
assistance spending is relatively high but remains untargeted with a limited impact on the 
risk of poverty. An outdated disability identification model leads to unfair and ineffective 
provision of disability based benefits and services. The draft law on a unified disability 
determination system passed through public consultation and legal harmonisation, but is 
pending adoption. An IT system for tracking and calculating social benefits is in place. 
Upgrading and upscaling of the system is envisaged. Individual activation plans aim at 
including beneficiaries of social assistance into the labour market. 
With regard to de-institutionalisation, insufficient progress has been made to continue the 
transition from institutional to community and family-based services. A Strategy for 
Deinstitutionalisation has been developed but is pending adoption. Centres for Social Work 
continue to lack adequate staffing, organisation and capacities. The Institute for Social and 
Child Protection does not have sufficient human capacities to ensure quality assurance and 
professional supervision.  
As concerns non-discrimination in employment and social policy, in 2023 the largest 
number of complaints presented to the Ombudsman were filed in the field of labour and 
employment (122).   


===== PAGE 76 =====
 
75 
 
With regard to equality between women and men in employment and social policy, the 
labour 
force 
participation 
rate 
of 
women 
in 
Montenegro remains with 
66.3% lower than the EU 
average (79.4%). The gender 
employment gap persists. 
Men make up 53.9% of all 
employed 
persons, 
compared 
to 
46.1% 
of 
women despite the fact that 
women make up a better-
educated 
part 
of 
the 
population. 
Efforts 
continued to expand access 
to childcare, but structural 
barriers affecting female labour force participation remain. Legislation exists in Montenegro 
to promote equal pay for work of equal value but weaknesses in policy mean that wage gaps 
persist. 
Chapter 20 - Enterprise and industrial policy  
EU industrial policy strengthens competitiveness, facilitates structural change and encourages 
a business-friendly environment that stimulates small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). 
In the area of enterprise and industrial policy principles, the 2023-2026 strategy for the 
development of micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) was adopted in June 2023. 
Following up on the Joint Conclusions of the Economic and Financial Dialogue between the 
EU and Montenegro from May 2023, the government adopted 2024-2026 Programme for the 
Suppression of the Informal Economy in December 2023. In August 2024, the government 
adopted the 2024-2028 industrial policy, aligned with the current EU industrial policy. 
In the area of enterprise and industrial policy instruments, in 2023, the government 
supported 380 MSMEs through financial support programmes, which amounted to a support 
of EUR 2.4 million, 18% above the figure registered in 2022. The agreement for participation 
of Montenegro in the Single Market Programme (SMP) 2021-2027 came into force in 
September 2023. 
In the area of sectoral policies, the report on the implementation of Montenegro’s 2019-2023 
Industrial Policy was published in April 2024. Overall, from the 61 planned activities, 41 were 
fully implemented, 16 partially implemented and 4 were not implemented, while the financial 
implementation reached 86% of the target or EUR 1.28 billion in the period 2019-2023.  
In March 2024, the Competitiveness Council adopted an action plan on barriers for doing 
business. The plan identifies 11 key barriers and 37 actions, classified into 4 areas: 
suppressing the grey economy; improving the business environment; improving the 
legislative framework and improving the efficiency of public administration.  
A first version of the register of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) was set up by the Ministry of 
Finance in February 2024. The register is intended to collect data and help in monitoring and 
reporting on fiscal risks of SOEs. As data will be publicly available, it should also improve 
transparency of information in the public domain.  
The Law on Deadlines for Settlement of Financial Obligations (aligned with the Directive on 
combating late payment in commercial transactions) is expected to be adopted in Q4 2024.  


===== PAGE 77 =====
 
76 
 
Chapter 25 - Science and research  
The EU provides signiﬁcant support for research and innovation. All EU Member States, 
associated countries and third countries participate in the EU’s research and innovation 
programmes, and can beneﬁt from them, especially where there is a scientiﬁc excellence and 
solid investment in research and innovation. 
Concerning research and innovation policy, the implementation of the smart specialisation 
strategy has delivered on expected objectives. In March 2024, Montenegro adopted a 
roadmap for the new smart specialisation strategy. 
Several projects, partially funded by the EU, helped strengthening the academia-business 
cooperation and raising the interest of young people as well as representatives of vulnerable 
groups to be involved, especially in new social entrepreneurship projects. 
The government adopted the Programme for Innovation 2023-2027, the Programme for 
encouraging innovation in the function of energy efficiency in industry, and the Action Plan 
for the implementation of the operational programme for the Smart Specialisation Strategy 
for the period 2023/2024. 
In January 2024 the government adopted the decision on forming the Council of Science 
and Research Activities which held several sessions. In July 2024, the government adopted 
the Strategy of Scientific Research Activity of Montenegro 2024-2028 along with the Action 
Plan for the period 2024-2025. Concerning the funding allocated to research and 
development for the year 2024, approximately EUR 15 million has been allocated which 
represents an increase of 19% compared to the previous year. 
The Innovation Centre continues to provide grants and support to innovative start-ups and 
companies on a regular basis, while Tehnopolis keeps increasing its own technical 
capacities and opening new programmes for interested citizens and businesses. The 
Science and Technology Park of Montenegro opened on 11 June 2024 to further promote 
and support the scientific community and innovations in the country.  
22 national scientific research projects are being implemented based on the co-financing 
call of the Ministry of Education, Science and Innovation in 2023, with a total funding of EUR 
2.3 million. 
Collaboration with the European Innovation Council remains strong, with the Innovation 
Fund's collaborative grants programme being implemented based on the certification for 
integration into the European Innovation Council Accelerator's Plug-In scheme, received in 
2023. In the 2024 European Innovation Scoreboard Montenegro is an Emerging Innovator 
with performance at 47.5% of the EU average. Its performance is slightly below the average 
of the Emerging Innovators. The performance gap with the EU has increased. 
Montenegro’s performance in the Horizon Europe programme dropped in 2023 to only four 
projects  receiving total funding of EUR 0.9 million. 
Chapter 26 - Education and culture  
The EU supports cooperation in education and culture through funding programmes and the 
coordination of Member State policies through the ‘open method of coordination’. The EU and 
the Member States must also prevent discrimination and ensure quality education for children 
of migrant workers, including those from disadvantaged backgrounds. 
Education and training  
A working group is operational for the development of a 10-year comprehensive and costed 
education sector strategy (2025-2035).Montenegro has also included various measures 
relating to education sector reform in its Growth Plan Reform Agenda. 


===== PAGE 78 =====
 
77 
 
Around 9% of the state budget for 2024 is dedicated to education, science, culture and 
sports. The 2024 public budget for education was increased by approximately 20% for non-
salary items, including an almost eight times higher allocation for teachers professional 
development compared to 2023.  
The enrolment in preschool education (3-6 years old) went up to 78% (EU average in 2022 
was 92.5%). Montenegro is working on the construction of new buildings, and reconstruction 
of existing buildings in order to increase the spatial capacity. The number of Roma children 
in preschool education increased by 11% and the coverage of the children with disabilities 
increased by less than 1%. 
Regarding international assessments of secondary education, the PISA 2022 results 
published end 2023 show declining results for Montenegrin students in all areas 
(mathematics, reading and science). The results show a high proportion of students of 15-
year-olds failing to demonstrate basic proficiency (level 2) in reading (53%), in maths (60%) 
and in science (55%). The relative underperformance of Montenegrin students in reading is 
confirmed also by the findings of the latest Progress in International Reading Literacy Study 
(PIRLS 2021), which show that Montenegro’s performance in reading is below the 
international median. Montenegro is taking part in the ongoing Trends in International 
Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS 2023) and Teaching and Learning International 
Survey (TALIS 2024).  
Regarding vocational education and training (VET), the Ministry of Education continued to 
be committed to the Osnabruck Declaration and reforms to address skills mismatches. 
More focus should be put on work-based learning at both VET and higher education levels. 
On 1 August 2024 the government adopted the Action plan related to the strategy on 
national vocational education and training for 2020-2024. 
In April 2024, Parliament adopted the Law on amendments to the Law on higher education, 
which will enable students to complete their studies under the same conditions that were 
valid at the time of their enrolment in the first year of the studies. In July 2024 the 
government adopted a new strategy for the development of higher education in Montenegro 
2024-2027 with the action plan for 2024-2025. Montenegro is a member of the European 
Higher Education Area (Bologna process). 
As for inclusive education, the number of Roma children in primary and secondary 
education dropped by 4% and 9% respectively. For children with disabilities the number 
continued to rise in primary and secondary schools, by 6% and 9%, respectively. The low 
take-up is still evident in the north and overall more efforts are needed to provide accessible 
and quality education for vulnerable groups. The support of mediators to Roma and Egyptian 
children continued.  
In terms of gender balance, participation in education is relatively even between boys and 
girls up to and throughout secondary school level. Instead, at higher education level in 2023 
38.2% of  graduates were boys and 61.8% were girls. 
Montenegro remains committed to progress in the area of digital education, emphasising 
the development of digital competencies, based on quality standards for digital content 
creation and aligning with the EU Digital Education Action Plan 2021-2027.  
There is no specific strategy focusing on green skills development. However, the issues of 
climate change, green economy, environmental protection, sustainable cities and 
settlements, biodiversity, and health education are included under all school subjects.  
Some civil society organisations reported on politicisation of education, especially in relation 
to the employment of teachers and professors, and the selection of directors and heads of 


===== PAGE 79 =====
 
78 
 
educational institutions. Montenegro should, therefore, take measures to secure an effective 
and merit-based system of appointing and electing school staff and management.  
Montenegro benefits from the international dimension of the 2021–2027 Erasmus+ 
Programme. As part of the enhanced partnership with the region, Montenegro can apply for 
the European Universities Initiative calls and one Montenegrin university has been selected 
as a partner in a funded alliance. Montenegro is not taking part to the European Education 
Area working groups 2021-2025. 
Youth 
The Youth Strategy 2023-2027, adopted in 2023, is under implementation. The Law on youth 
is under revision to address some key issues related to youth policy implementation. 
Support should be provided for all youth centres and clubs to operate with and for 
adolescents and young people, with adequate space and human resources, alongside 
budget, and with more efforts to collaborate with schools, school parliaments, municipalities 
and the private sector. The National Youth Council is not in place and inter-ministerial and 
cross-sectoral cooperation remains a challenge. 
Sport  
The draft Strategy for the Development of Sport for the period 2024-2028, along with the 
Action Plan 2024-2025 was publicly consulted and is awaiting adoption by the government. 
Culture  
The National Cultural Development Programme 2023-2027 is being implemented and the 
procedures for the amendment of the new Laws on culture and in the field of cultural 
heritage are under revision. The revision is  linked to amendments to the Law on the 
protection of cultural properties, the Law on library field and the Law on museum field that 
need alignement with international standards. Despite a temporary suspension from the 
MEDIA strand between January and July 2024, Montenegro continues to participate fully in 
the Creative Europe Programme. Efforts could be intensified to implement protection 
measures for the preservation of Kotor's UNESCO World Heritage status. 
Chapter 29 - Customs union  
All Member States are part of the EU customs union and follow the same customs rules and 
procedures. This requires legislative alignment as well as adequate implementing and 
enforcement capacity and access to the common computerised customs systems. 
On customs legislation, in December 2023, the government adopted the Customs Tariff for 
2024, aligned with the Combined Nomenclature of the European Union for 2024. The Law on 
accession to the Convention on a common transit procedure is still not adopted.  
In October 2023, Montenegro aligned its secondary legislation on customs procedures and 
formalities in relation to goods with reasonable suspicion of infringing intellectual property 
rights. In March 2024, the government adopted secondary legislation on temporary export of 
cultural goods, antiques and works of art. Legislation to control the production of and trade 
in drug precursors and psychotropic substances is not yet adopted.  
Concerning operational and administrative capacity, in December 2023, the government 
reversed the merger of the Customs Administration and Tax Administration, accomplished 
in 2021. A new personnel plan for the Customs Administration was  adopted in August 2024.  
Work on the severely delayed implementation of the New Computerised Transit System 
(NCTS) continued. The implementation of the NCTS at national level was delayed again. 
Several projects funded by the EU and its Member States are under way to upgrade various 
customs IT systems or build capacity in different areas of the customs service operation. 


===== PAGE 80 =====
 
79 
 
Ten operators are currently licensed in the Authorised Economic Operator (AEO) 
programme. In October 2023, Montenegro submitted a formal request to the CEFTA 
Secretariat for validation of the AEO programme, which took place in June 2024. The 
validation mission concluded that Montenegro is fully compliant with CEFTA Additional 
Protocol 5 AEO standards.  
In 2023, the Customs Administration collected EUR 2.54 billion, 22.5% more than in 2022. In 
the first semester of 2024, revenue collection amounted to EUR 592,87 million, which is 
7.15% higher than in the comparative period in 2023. 
The implementation of the cargo targeting system in the Port of Bar is in its trial phase. The 
initial results show that it has improved the risk analysis and enabled the exchange of 
electronic records of containers and ships entering and exiting the port. Once fully 
operational, the system should reinforce Custom’s capacity to enforce customs legislation 
at this critical border crossing point. 
In March 2024, the government established a coordination body for the stock inventory in 
the Free Zone of the Port of Bar, which adopted the action plan for the destruction of seized 
cigarettes. However, surveillance and control of all port operations, including on shipments 
of tobacco products, still remains an issue. In December 2023, the Revenue and Customs 
Administration seized cigarettes worth EUR 1.6 million without excise stamps in the free 
zone of the port.  
 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY  
This cluster covers: transport (Chapter 14); energy (Chapter 15); trans-European networks 
(Chapter 21); and environment and climate change (Chapter 27).  
Chapter 14 - Transport policy  
The EU has common rules on technical and safety standards, security, social standards, State 
aid and market liberalisation in road transport, railways, inland waterways, multimodal 
transport, aviation and maritime transport. 
As regards general transport, there was no progress on the update of the national transport 
strategy (Transport Development Strategy 2019-2035) to align it with the European Smart 
and Sustainable Mobility Strategy. Montenegro actively participates in the Transport 
Community work and structures, but progress on the implementation of the action plans 
endorsed by the organisation remains slow to moderate.  
There is an urgent need to increase the number and the level of expertise of staff working in 
regulatory and policy implementation functions in the recently divided Ministries of 
Transport and Maritime Affairs. The inter-ministerial coordination of transport and maritime 
policies needs to be ensured. For larger transport agglomerations, sustainable urban 
mobility plans that respect environmental and social standards should be developed, 
following EU practice.  
In the area of road transport, Montenegro adopted its new, 2024-2030 road safety strategy 
in July 2024 Good institutional governance with a shared responsibility amongst 
stakeholders is essential for its full implementation and swift reduction of the current, high 
number of fatalities and serious injuries. A new mid-term road maintenance and 
rehabilitation programme is not yet adopted and Montenegro continues to rely on annual 
planning. The implementation of the Intelligent Transport Systems programme 2022 – 2026 
for national roads is lagging behind schedule and the allocation of capacities and resources 
remains unclear. Further efforts are needed to fully align with the EU acquis on social and 
market rules in road transport. 


===== PAGE 81 =====
 
80 
 
On rail transport legislation, there was no progress on alignment with the EU acquis. In 
December 2023, the government agreed on remedy measures to address a number of 
systematic and sustainability issues in the railways sector. One of the actions is a merger of 
the railway transport company with the rolling-stock maintenance company, to avoid the 
imminent insolvency of the latter. In a first step, in May 2024, the government purchased 
shares of minority stakeholders in both companies, becoming their sole owner.  
In the area of maritime transport, full implementation of the Vessels Traffic and Monitoring 
System (second phase) was delayed, which complicates the enforcement of maritime safety 
polices in Boka Kotorska Bay. National maritime Single Window was launched in August 
2024.  
In the area of inland waterway transport, there were no developments.  
As regards aviation, Montenegro achieved a good level of alignment with the EU acquis. 
Before transition to the second phase of the European Common Aviation Area Agreement 
(ECAA) is possible, competition and State aid requirements need to be fulfilled. In April 2024, 
the government decided to continue with the second stage of the tender procedure for 
airports concession, with advisory support of the International Finance Corporation.  
There were no relevant developments on multimodal transport, neither on passenger rights. 
Montenegro is encouraged to improve them for all modes of transport. 
Chapter 15 - Energy  
EU energy policy covers energy supply, infrastructure, the internal energy market, consumers, 
renewable energy, energy efficiency, nuclear energy and nuclear safety, radiation protection 
and nuclear safeguards.  
The heavily delayed work on the National Energy and Climate Plan, a strategic document for 
the development of the energy sector until 2030, is still ongoing. The document is yet to be 
submitted for opinion to the Energy Community Secretariat.  
In the area of security of supply, another long-delayed document, the Law on security of 
supply of petroleum products was sent to Parliament, but is yet to be adopted. 
The construction of the electricity interconnection with Serbia, a crucial section for the 
completion of the trans-Balkan electricity transmission network, did not start yet. The 
connection to the state border with Serbia (from Pljevlja) is planned for completion by 2028. 
Another section in Montenegro (Lastva – Pljevlja) is still not finished due to property issues 
and environmental concerns. 
Concerning the internal energy market, Montenegro is delayed in the alignment with and 
implementation of the Electricity Integration Package, which is a precondition for market 
integration. The day-ahead market registered 26 participants; the launch of the intraday 
market is still pending. The designation of the Nominated Electricity Market Operator 
in May 2024 paves the way for energy market coupling with neighbouring countries. The 
national energy regulatory authority’s (REAGEN) institutional independence should be 
enhanced by aligning its staff regulations with those applicable to other independent bodies.   
In the area of hydrocarbons, Parliament is yet to adopt the Law on safety measures in 
offshore exploration and production of hydrocarbons. The construction of Montenegro’s 
section of the Ionian-Adriatic Gas Pipeline (IAP) did not progress as a consensus on the 
preferred alignment is yet to be achieved.  
On renewable energy, in August 2024, Parliament adopted the Law on the use of energy 
from renewable sources. However, the adoption of secondary legislation is still needed for 
the practical implementation. The registry of Guarantees of Origins is operational since July 


===== PAGE 82 =====
 
81 
 
2024. The government of Montenegro, together with the Electrical Power Company of 
Montenegro (EPCG), implemented two programmes of installing solar panels in households, 
leading to the installation of 29.3 MW in 3 200 households by the end of 2023. It remains 
essential that all new renewable energy projects are developed in conformity with the acquis 
on concessions, State aid and the environment. 
In the area of energy efficiency, a localised support to the Pljevlja coal region was achieved 
with the support of international partners. The implementation of 2023 Energy Support 
package funds earmarked for energy efficiency (EUR 13 million) started in July 2024, 
focusing on households, tourism sector and energy efficiency innovation projects. The 
application of new rules for minimum energy performance requirements and certification of 
buildings started in July 2024. However, further alignment with the Energy Performance of 
Buildings Directive needs to be accelerated. 
Regarding nuclear energy, nuclear safety and radiation protection, Law on Ionising 
Radiation Protection, Radiation and Nuclear Safety and Security was adopted in May 2024, 
aligning the legal framework with numerous EU legal acts. However, the implementation will 
start in July 2027.  
Chapter 21 - Trans-European networks  
The EU promotes trans-European networks in transport, telecommunications and energy to 
strengthen the internal market and contribute to growth and employment. 
In the area of transport networks, the revised TEN-T regulation  is setting up a new Western 
Balkans-Eastern Mediterranean European Transport Corridor, which includes Montenegro. 
In the area of transport-infrastructure development, the TEN-T rail corridor Bar-Vrbnica 
faced signiﬁcant delay, due to limited absorption and management capacity of the 
responsible administrative bodies.  
On road network, the EU-financed update to the Bar-Boljare highway’s feasibility study and 
detailed design of the next section of the highway (Matesevo – Andrijevica) started in 
September 2023, with significant delays. However, in January 2024, Montenegro decided to 
fast-track the construction of this section under a design and built works contract. Partial 
funding should come from the state budget, with co-financing from the EBRD and the EU 
(EUR 200 million). The prequalification tender procedure started in April 2024, following 
EBRD procurement policies and rules.  
In March 2024, Montenegro ratified an agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina for the 
construction of a cross-border bridge over the Tara river on the TEN-T comprehensive Route 
2b. A number of recently announced road development projects, such as a new inland route 
for the Adriatic-Ionian Highway, in addition to the previously planned coastal route 
expressway, depart significantly from the plans agreed under TEN-T network and the 
country’s Transport Community commitments, making EU-funded feasibility and design 
studies obsolete and potentially undermining the progress of Montenegro under this 
chapter.  
In the area of energy networks, work continued slowly on the electricity interconnection 
between the systems of Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Italy and Montenegro. There was 
no progress on the Ionian-Adriatic Gas Pipeline (IAP) project.  
Overall, infrastructure investments need to comply fully with EU standards on public 
procurement, State aid and environmental impact assessment. New investment needs to 
address changing strategic priorities, decarbonisation, digitalisation and resilience of 
transport and energy networks, including prior cost-benefit analyses carried out in line with 
EU best practice.  


===== PAGE 83 =====
 
82 
 
Montenegro did not engage with the European Commission on the latest investment 
planning projects until 2030, except for the Bar-Boljare corridor. The country is yet to align its 
legislation with the EU acquis on TEN-T and TEN-E, including the recent revisions. 
Chapter 27 - Environment and climate change  
The EU promotes strong climate action, sustainable development and protection of the 
environment. EU rules contain provisions addressing climate change, water and air quality, 
waste management, nature protection, industrial pollution, chemicals, noise and civil 
protection. 
In November 2023, the government adopted the ﬁfth semi-annual report on the 
implementation of the action plan for fulﬁlling the closing benchmarks in Chapter 27. The 
report showed that out of 116 planned activities only nine were implemented (8%).  
In the fields of environment and climate change, Montenegro needs to significantly 
strengthen the administrative capacities at central and local level by urgently addressing 
staff shortages and hiring personnel, address the issue of insufficient inspection services at 
both levels, and address the insufficient interinstitutional coordination and the lack of 
sustainable financial framework. The lack of administrative capacities significantly hinders 
the progress in Chapter 27 and fulfilling its closing benchmarks. Montenegro should ensure 
that there is an institutional structure in place to deliver coordinated, strategic planning for 
environmental and climate investments, including the quality of the preparation and 
implementation of investments. 
Environment 
As regards horizontal legislation, Montenegro completed one Strategic Environmental 
Assessment and 73 Environmental Impact Assessments.  Montenegro is encouraged to 
increase synergies, coordination between Strategic Environment Assessments and 
Environmental Impact Assessments to make better use of such documents in its planning 
and implementation. Montenegro should also ensure that environmental monitoring meets 
EU standards and that all infrastructure investments comply with the EU environmental and 
climate acquis and ensure public participation. 
On air quality, Montenegro did not make progress and the adoption of the Air Quality 
Management Strategy was once again postponed.  
In April 2024, Parliament adopted the Law on waste management. Efforts should now be 
directed towards its implementation and the adoption of the long-awaited state waste 
management plan for 2024-2029. When it comes to single-use plastic products, Montenegro 
announced that a ban on the use of plastic bags with a wall thickness of 5 to 15 microns will 
be applied as of October 2024 whereas the use of light plastic bags with a wall thickness of 
less than 5 microns will be allowed with the introduction of an environmental tax. As part of 
the implementation of the new law on waste management, it was planned that from July 
2024, consumers of all plastic bags, except for biodegradable ones, will be obliged to pay an 
environmental fee. Cooperation of local authorities and municipalities on waste 
management is paramount. Infrastructure for separate waste collection and recycling exists, 
but it is however  not used properly by citizens, and the issue of illegal and temporary waste 
disposal has yet to be resolved. Educational campaigns including in school curricula and 
media for awareness raising and proper enforcement rules, targeting citizens including 
children and local authorities, about separating waste disposal and recycling, are needed.  
Concerning water quality, in February 2024, the government adopted the 2024 programme 
for monitoring surface and ground water. In December 2023, the Water Administration 
presented a new water information system (VIS), a unique database on surface and 
underground water, providing a solid basis for the sustainable management of water 


===== PAGE 84 =====
 
83 
 
resources. This should enable the establishment of a cadastre of water polluters. Four new 
inspectors were recruited. Montenegro should adopt a sewage sludge management plan 
that would define the matter and handling and treatment of generated sewage sludge at 
both the state and local self-government levels.  
Work is still ongoing on the draft law on nature protection and the National Strategy for 
biodiversity and its action plan is still pending. Work on Natura 2000 network continued and 
about 60% of habitat territory is mapped – that work should further continue to identify and 
pre-designate all the sites that will be covered by the Natura 2000 network. Montenegro still 
needs to address the recommendations of the Bern Convention related to Skadar lake. The 
management issue in Ulcinj Salina is not yet resolved and the management plan  is still 
pending; more active involvement from both central and local level including the 
municipality, is needed to address these issues and to ensure that Ulcinj Salina remains 
ecologically sustainable. Montenegro should find an adequate solution for the military 
training polygon at Sinjajevina Natural Park. 
Concerning industrial pollution and risk management, the Agency for Environmental 
protection issued one new integrated permit and reissued another one, and two more 
permits were revised. The ecological reconstruction for the Pljevlja coal power plant will not 
address the core issues and Montenegro needs to step up efforts to permanently close the 
plant to meet EU emission standards. the Agency for Environmental protection issued one 
new integrated permit and re-issued another one, and two more permits were revised. 
On chemicals, in January 2024, the government adopted amendments to the Law on 
biocidal products. In line with the Law on chemicals, a number of implementing acts were 
adopted. Work is also ongoing on amending the Law on flammable liquids and gases.  
In December 2023, Montenegro adopted the rulebook on the methods of calculations and 
measurement of noise in the environment. The revision of strategic noise maps started for 
Podgorica. No public awareness raising campaigns were held on noise protection.  
Significant progress was made in the area of civil protection. In February 2024, 
Montenegro’s Rescue and Protection Directorate’s Operational Center (OKC 112) 
successfully completed its connection to the Common Emergency Communication and 
Information System (CECIS) network thus strengthening the operational capacity of 
Montenegro and coordination with the Union’s Civil Protection Mechanism.  
Climate change 
There were no  developments on climate change nor on legislative alignment with the acquis 
on climate. Montenegro needs to step up its efforts to implement commitments under the 
Energy Community’s Decarbonisation Roadmap, particularly to finalise and adopt the 
National Energy and Climate Change Plan (NECP) in line with the 2050 climate neutrality 
target.  
 Montenegro is urged to fully implement the Monitoring, Reporting, Veriﬁcation and 
Accreditation (MRVA) of greenhouse gas emissions by December 2025 as well as take 
decisive steps for improving its current and/or establishing new  carbon pricing 
mechanisms, to facilitate a future alignment with the EU Emission Trading Scheme.  
Montenegro is working on developing a low emissions development strategy. Montenegro 
is also set to adopt its draft Law on the protection from negative impacts of climate change 
and ozone layer protection to align with EU acquis on Ozone Depleting substances. The 
country should set a coal phase out date and prepare and submit new National Determined 
Contribution under the Paris Agreement. Consideration ought to be given to aligning with 
major upgrades of the EU climate policy as a result of the Fit for 55 package. 


===== PAGE 85 =====
 
84 
 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION  
This cluster covers: agriculture and rural development (Chapter 11); food safety, veterinary 
and phytosanitary policy (Chapter 12); fisheries and aquaculture (Chapter 13); regional 
policy and coordination of structural instruments (Chapter 22); and financial and budgetary 
provisions (Chapter 33). 
Chapter 11 - Agriculture and rural development 
The EU’s common agricultural policy supports farmers and ensures Europe’s food security. It 
helps tackle climate change and the sustainable management of national resources; maintains 
rural areas and landscapes across the EU; and keeps the rural economy alive by promoting jobs 
in farming, agri-food industries and associated sectors. This requires strong management and 
control systems. There are also common EU rules for marketing standards, quality policy and 
organic farming.  
On horizontal issues, legislative alignment with EU acquis on agriculture and rural 
development still needs to see progress. Montenegro has prepared the first draft of an 
Implementation plan to set up the paying agency and the integrated administration and 
control system (IACS) as per the two closing benchmarks in Chapter 11. 
Work is ongoing on the register of agricultural holdings. There was progress in establishing 
IACS by significantly increasing the land area  encoded in the land parcel identification 
system (LPIS). The rolling out of LPIS across the whole territory should be  accelerated to 
advance on the closing benchmark in this chapter. Preparations are still ongoing to secure 
new orthophotographs to update the system. The development of  the farm accountancy 
data network (FADN), its extension to environmental and social data il line with the EU 
acquis, and the strengthening of farm advisory services should be accelerated.  
As regards the common market organisation (CMO), Montenegro needs to step up the 
implementation of activities under the action plan on EU acquis alignment. Legislation on 
oenological practices in the wine sector aligning with the EU acquis was adopted in October 
2024. The Law on wine will continue to be further updated in line with EU acquis 
developments. Work on developing an electronic vineyard register should be finalised in 
2024.  
The amendments to the Law on olive growing and olive oil, laying down clearer rules for the 
production and placing on the market of olive oil and  on control provisions are still pending 
Parliamentary adoption.  
In the area of rural development, Montenegro received a conditional roll over entrustment 
for the IPARD III programme, followed by the opening of four calls for applications under the 
new programme covering  four  measures. This is a significant development.  Spending 
under the IPARD II has  improved in the past year, and with 2024 the last year of 
implementation of the programme  Montenegro is  strongly encouraged to put further 
efforts into ensuring full absorption of the funds this year. Montenegro continued to 
strengthen the administrative capacity of the IPARD Agency by hiring additional staff. Work 
on setting up the IPARD Agency’s regional offices needs to continue.  
As regards quality policy, the recommendations of the 2019 EU peer review mission still 
require follow-up, including activities to strengthen the control system. 
For  organic farming  legislation on organic production further aligning with the EU acquis is 
still pending. 


===== PAGE 86 =====
 
85 
 
Chapter 12 - Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy  
The EU food acquis including hygiene rules for foodstuff production ensure a high level of food 
and feed safety and a high level of protection of consumers’ interests. Animal health and 
welfare and the safety of food of animal origin are safeguarded together with quality of seeds, 
plant protection material, protection against harmful organisms and animal nutrition.  
There was a small reduction in inspection capacities in  the  sectors of food safety and 
veterinary due to retiring of staff but tenders have been launched for the employment of 
eight new personnel, which should help reverse this trend.  Adequate training should be 
provided to officials including developing measures to avoid conflict of interest of the 
authorised veterinarians carrying out official duties which is a basic principle of the Official 
Controls Regulation. 
In the area of general food safety, the 2023 programme for food and feed safety quality 
measures, including the monitoring programme for residues in animals and products of 
animal origin was implemented and the 2024 programme was prepared.  
 As regards veterinary policy and animal welfare. Montenegro adopted further implementing 
legislation to align with the EU acquis. The first programme for monitoring zoonoses, 
zoonotic agents and their antimicrobial resistance (AMR) was implemented. The 2023 
programme of mandatory animal health protection measures was implemented and the 
2024 programme prepared. The disease surveillance programmes were implemented. In 
January 2024, the presence of the African swine fever virus was confirmed in Montenegro 
and measures to reduce the risk of spread of the disease as well as awareness raising 
campaigns were implemented. In March 2024, the government adopted a crisis 
management plan. 
Measures were in place to prevent, detect and control avian influenza and there were no new 
cases. However, efforts are still necessary to further strengthen the surveillance programme 
for notifiable avian diseases.  
The last EU-financed vaccination campaign against rabies was successfully implemented in 
autumn 2023. As necessary, Montenegro should continue the campaign autonomously. A 
robust passive surveillance system of the disease remains to be established. There was no 
progress in implementing a dog population control programme. Local governments 
awareness on the importance of establishing such controls remains low and further work in 
this area is necessary.  
In the area of placing food, feed and animal by-products on the market, the implementation 
of the national programme for the upgrading of food establishments dealing with the food of 
animal origin continued. According to Montenegrin authorities, a total of 75 establishments 
have now been upgraded and classified as Category I – i.e. compliant with EU requirements.  
The total number of establishments dealing with food of animal origin regarded as 
compliant with EU requirements at the moment is 128. 
The implementation of activities linked to the management of animal by-products not 
intended for human consumption progressed slowly due to problems with the location of the 
facility for processing animal by-products.  A new location was found in the Municipality of 
Niksic and the government  approved in April 2024 the information regarding the change in 
location and construction of the facility The 5-year Management Plan for animal by-products 
not intended for human consumption expired in 2023 and a new one is yet to be prepared. 
The national programme for improving raw milk quality and handling non-compliant milk 
was implemented leading to an increase in the percentage of raw milk that meets EU 
requirements. Measures to improve hygiene in all stages of milk productions have to be 
developed. 


===== PAGE 87 =====
 
86 
 
In the area of food safety rules and specific rules for feed, Montenegro implemented the 
2023 programme of food and feed safety measures and adopted the 2024 programme.  
On phytosanitary policy, further pieces of implementing legislation were adopted. The 2023 
programme of phytosanitary measures was implemented, including the programme of 
control of production of seed and propagating material and plant genetic resources and the 
programme for 2024 was prepared. It is important to strengthen actions in the field, and 
especially with regard to surveys, early detection and eradication of pests. The programme 
for monitoring pesticide residues in food of plant and animal origin for 2023 was 
implemented and the results were reported to the European Food Safety Agency. 
Implementation of the 2021-2026 national plan for sustainable use of pesticides was carried 
out and awareness was raised. 
 In the area of genetically modified organisms (GMOs), the programme of control testing of 
seed and planting material for GMOs for 2024 was adopted.   
Chapter 13 - Fisheries and aquaculture 
The common fisheries policy lays down rules on fisheries management, protects living 
resources of the sea and limits the environmental impact of fisheries. This includes setting 
catch quotas, managing fleet capacity, rules on control and inspection, rules on markets and 
aquaculture and support for fisheries and coastal communities. Further, it promotes a 
sustainable aquaculture. 
In March 2024, Montenegro adopted a new fisheries and aquaculture strategy 2024-2029 
and action plan. In April 2024, the Law on ratification of the Protocol on Amendments to the 
Marrakesh Agreement on the Establishment of the World Trade Organization - agreement on 
subsidies in fisheries was adopted. The Law on market organisation in fisheries and 
aquaculture was adopted by the Parliament in August 2024. There were no significant 
developments concerning structural actions, or State aid. The Law on structural measures 
and State aid in fisheries and aquaculture has been pending adoption by Parliament since 
2019 and work is ongoing on its update. Work is also ongoing on the draft Law on Marine 
Fisheries and Mariculture.   
The administrative capacities of the Directorate for fisheries were strengthened by 
employing an additional adviser for the market organisation of fishery and aquaculture 
products.  
As regards resource and fleet management, the 2023 annual data collection programme on 
Montenegrin fisheries, for both commercial catches and biological data, was implemented. 
The management plan for the fishing gear bottom trawls, purse seines and beach seines, 
aligned with the recommendations of the General Fisheries Commission for the 
Mediterranean (GFCM), was adopted in October 2023. . Efforts were undertaken to 
modernise the fishing fleet and introduce and apply measures of sustainable, profitable and 
efficient fishing, increase market competitiveness and meet EU food safety standards and 
maritime regulation. Eight contracts were signed with fishermen as a result of the second 
call for grant support for investments in fishing vessels, including fishing equipment and 
electronic devices (MIDAS 2 project). The value of the grant support was EUR 1.2 million 
(70% of the investment).  
Regarding inspections and control, work is ongoing to further update and upgrade the 
Fisheries Information System (FIS). The equipping of 10 landing places with devices for 
measuring and registering catches is underway.  
There were no developments in the dialogue with Albania to harmonise the management of 
the joint European eel resources and on control of illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) 
fishing. There was no increase in the number of fisheries inspectors. However, the capacity 


===== PAGE 88 =====
 
87 
 
strengthening of the current inspectors continued through participation in field training 
conducted by the European Fisheries Control Agency (EFCA), as well as training aimed at 
familiarisation with CFP legislation and its application.  
Concerning international fora, Montenegro initiated the process to ratify the agreement for 
full membership of International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas 
(ICCAT).  The implementation of the European Strategy for the Adriatic-Ionian Region and 
collaboration with the GFCM continued.   
Chapter 22 - Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments  
Regional policy is the EU’s main tool for reducing regional disparities and investing in 
sustainable and inclusive socio-economic growth. It is operating through ‘shared management’ 
between the Commission and EU Member States. The implementation of cohesion policy 
programmes requires appropriate administrative capacity on programme and project level, the 
establishment of systems of sound financial management and control and also the fulfilment 
of other EU acquis elements such as environmental or public procurement legislation. 
Regarding the legislative framework, as part of the updated action plan for chapter 22,the 
adoption of the Law on European Structural and Investment Funds, which lays down the 
institutional framework for the management of investment funds and future European 
structural funds, is envisaged for 2026. 
Concerning the institutional framework, the entrustment of budget implementation for 
managing the IPA 2021 annual programme indirect management parts was approved in 
April 2024. The process for requesting entrustment for the management of IPA III 
operational programmes has advanced but needs to be finalised as per agreed timelines. 
The Working Group for Chapter 22 met twice and engaged into a multi-stakeholders 
consultation for updating the Chapter 22 Action Plan with a focus on closing benchmarks. 
The administrative capacity remains a crucial area for reform. The government resumed a 
retention policy within the public administration. A number of temporary contracts were 
turned into permanent positions. A competency-based training needs analysis was 
commissioned with the aim to prepare recommendations on capacity development for IPA 
structures and the government engaged into a functional review in selected policy areas 
relevant to regional policy. Funds were set aside throughout IPA financial support to target 
the preparation and implementation of a merit-based recruitment policy.  
In the area of programming, monitoring and evaluation, the country completed the design of 
two IPA III multi-annual operational programmes (2024-2027) and deployed international 
expertise to strengthen its capacities. Inter-ministerial coordination and structured dialogue 
with social partners and civil society need to be strengthened. Montenegro continues to 
participate in the Interreg cooperation programmes, the EU Strategy for the Adriatic and 
Ionian Region and the EU Strategy for the Danube Region. 
On financial management, control and audit, the government engaged into a process of 
strengthening its capacities and of assurance mechanisms for the management of the IPA II 
and IPA III programmes. The National Authorising Officer approved improved reporting 
templates and an updated manual of procedures in December 2023. 
Chapter 33 - Financial and budgetary provisions  
This chapter covers the rules governing the funding of the EU budget (‘own resources’). These 
resources mainly consist of: (i) contributions based on the gross national income of each 
Member State; (ii) customs duties; (iii) the non-recycled plastic resource; and (iv) a resource 
based on value-added tax. Member States must have the appropriate administrative capacity 


===== PAGE 89 =====
 
88 
 
to adequately coordinate and ensure the correct calculation, collection, payment and control of 
own resources.  
There was some progress in the underlying policy areas indirectly affecting the own-
resources system (for progress in these areas, see chapters 16: Taxation, 18: Statistics, 27: 
Environment and climate change; 29: Customs union, and 32: Financial control).  
On traditional own resources, the government adopted implementing legislation on the 
procedure for planning the resources that Montenegro pays to the EU budget in July 2023. In 
October 2023, the Ministry of Finance adopted the Guidelines for Planning the European 
Union’s Own Resources in Montenegro which set the obligations, procedures, responsible 
institutions, overview of current EU regulations and reporting forms to the European 
Commission. In August 2023, the government adopted the final report on the 
implementation of the action plan for establishing a system of the EU’s own resources in 
Montenegro.  
As regards VAT-based resources, the Statistical Office has calculated the average weighted 
VAT rate. 
In the area of gross national income-based resources, Montenegro’s GDP is calculated 
using the European system of national and regional accounts 2010 methodology, while the 
informal economy is calculated in accordance with the OECD and Eurostat manuals. 
As regards administrative infrastructure, the Directorate for Coordination and Management 
of EU Own Resources in the Ministry of Finance continued to improve its capacity, focusing 
on planning, coordination, calculation and administrative conditions of own resources. 
 
CLUSTER 6: EXTERNAL RELATIONS  
There are two chapters in this cluster: external relations (Chapter 30) and foreign, security 
and defence policy (Chapter 31). 
Chapter 30 - External relations 
The EU has a common commercial policy towards non-EU countries, based on multilateral and 
bilateral agreements and autonomous measures. There are also EU rules in the field of 
humanitarian aid and development policy. 
As regards the common commercial policy, Montenegro continued to coordinate its 
positions with those of the EU, including in the World Trade Organization.  
Montenegro continued to actively participate in Central European Free Trade Agreement 
(CEFTA) working groups, including in the negotiations on CEFTA Additional Protocol 7 on 
trade dispute settlement. In December 2023, the Parliament ratified the Agreement on the 
recognition of professional qualification of the general care nurses, doctors of veterinary 
medicine, pharmacists and midwives under CEFTA. The agreement is yet to enter into force 
for Montenegro. 
In December 2023, the Parliament also ratified three agreements of the Common Regional 
Market concerning freedom of movement based on identity cards, recognition of 
professional qualifications for regulated professions (medical doctors, dentists and 
architects), and recognition of academic qualifications. These agreements entered into 
force in February 2024.  
Given that the country’s Trade Facilitation Strategy expired in 2022 and has not been 
replaced by another trade facilitation programme, in March 2024 the government invited all 
interested stakeholders to participate in the preparation of a new proposal. 


===== PAGE 90 =====
 
89 
 
On dual-use goods, Montenegro’s application for membership in the Australia Group is now 
in the scrutiny phase. The application process to join the Wassenaar Arrangement is still 
ongoing.  
In accordance with a new draft Law on Montenegro’s Development Bank, this newly 
established entity should become the export credit insurer against non-market risks for the 
Montenegrin companies.   
Regarding bilateral trade agreements, negotiations with Ukraine to amend the Free Trade 
Agreement concerning rules of origin and methods of administrative cooperation are 
ongoing. Given that the ratification procedure for the Agreement on Economic Cooperation 
with South Korea was not finalised in 2023 under the previous term of Parliament, the 
procedure needs to restart. There were no relevant developments in negotiations for an 
Agreement on Trade, Partnership and Cooperation between Montenegro and the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 
In the area of development policy and humanitarian aid, in April 2024, Parliament adopted 
the Law on international development cooperation and international humanitarian 
assistance. The law updates the country’s legal and institutional framework by setting up a 
decentralised system in these areas. A database on donor support projects, to be set under 
the new law, remains to be developed. 
Chapter 31 - Foreign, security and defence policy 
Member States must be able to conduct political dialogue under the EU foreign, security and 
defence policy, align with EU statements, take part in EU actions, and apply agreed sanctions 
and restrictive measures. 
The political dialogue between the EU and Montenegro on foreign and security policy issues 
continued. In February 2024 Montenegro participated in the tenth EU-Western Balkans 
meeting of Political Directors on CFSP. In June 2024 Montenegro participated in a working 
lunch with members of the Foreign Affairs Council.  
The institutional framework enabling Montenegro’s participation in the EU CFSP and CSDP is 
in place. On common foreign and security policy (CFSP), Montenegro continued its 100% 
CFSP alignment with statements by the High Representative on behalf of the European 
Union and Council decisions on sanctions. This included all EU sanction packages against 
Russia and Belarus. Montenegro also aligned with the EU position in UNGA when voting on 
resolutions regarding Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine and its humanitarian 
impact and on initiatives in the UN Human Rights Council with regard to the human rights 
situation in China, Iran and Gaza. Montenegro participated in the Summit on Peace in 
Ukraine hosted by Switzerland. 
On restrictive measures implementation, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs drafted a new law 
on restrictive measures to improve the national legal framework in line with European 
Commission and FATF recommendations.  
Montenegro continued cooperating with international organisations (UN, OSCE and Council 
of Europe) and remained an active member of NATO. Montenegro needs to update the 
national action plan on implementation of Women, Peace and Security.  
In September 2024 Montenegro has notified the United States of its wish to bring to an end 
the bilateral immunity agreement with the United States, granting US citizens exemptions 
from the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court. This brings Montenegro to 
alignment with the EU common positions on the integrity of the Rome Statute or with the 
related EU guiding principles on bilateral immunity agreements. 


===== PAGE 91 =====
 
90 
 
Concerning conflict prevention, during the reporting period, Montenegro met all obligations 
in accordance with the OSCE Conflict Prevention Centre Implementation Calendar in the 
area of arms control. 
Regarding non-proliferation, Montenegro remained actively engaged in the implementation 
of the Western Balkans Small Arms and Light Weapons (SALW) Roadmap and implemented 
its 2019-2025 strategy and action plan for combating illegal possession, misuse, and 
trafficking of SALW. While Montenegro is not yet a participating state to any of the 
multilateral export control regimes, a  meeting with Australia Group took place in January 
2024 for Montenegro to update on its export control processes. Montenegro implements the 
2023-2028 Roadmap for the prevention, detection, suppression and protection against 
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear threats and risks (CBRN), prevention and 
suppression of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and means of their delivery 
and preventing them from falling into the hands of non-state actors. Alignment with the EU 
Common Position 2008/944 on arms export control is advanced, with further work required 
on inter-state exchange of information. Montenegro is a signatory state to the Arms Trade 
Treaty since 2013 and should ratify and domesticate the Treaty as soon as possible. 
In terms of security measures, Montenegro continued to implement its agreement on 
security of information with the EU on procedures regarding exchange of classified 
information.  
As regards common security and defence policy (CSDP), Montenegro continues to 
participate in EU crisis management missions and operations under the CSDP, currently in 
the EU NAVFOR ATALANTA. In September 2023, Montenegro submitted an official request 
to contribute to the EU Military Assistance Mission in support of Ukraine (EUMAM Ukraine) 
in cooperation with the Armed Forces of Slovenia. Montenegro contributes to regional 
cooperation in military medicine through the Balkan Medical Task Force (BMTF). 
As regards hybrid threats, Montenegro aligned with EU Declarations and restrictive 
measures in reaction to cyber-attacks in 2023 and 2024. 
 
 


===== PAGE 92 =====
 
91 
 
ANNEX I – RELATIONS BETWEEN THE EU AND MONTENEGRO  
Within the framework of the accession negotiations, by October 2024, all 33 screened 
chapters, including chapters 23 and 24 on the rule of law, had been opened, three of which – 
science and research, education and culture, and external relations – have been 
provisionally closed. In in June 2024 the Inter-Governmental Conference on accession 
negotiations with Montenegro confirmed that Montenegro overall met the interim 
benchmarks for the rule of law chapters 23 and 24, and set the closing benchmarks for 
these chapters. This opens a new phase in the accession negotiations to proceed with 
provisionally closing further chapters. 
Montenegro is participating in the Stabilisation and Association Process. Montenegro 
continued to broadly implement its obligations under the Stabilisation and Association 
Agreement (SAA). Regular political and economic dialogue between the EU and Montenegro 
has continued through the SAA structures. Regular subcommittee meetings were held 
throughout the period. The Stabilisation and Association Committee met in February 2024 
and the SA Council in July 2022. The Stabilisation and Association Parliamentary Committee 
met in March 2024. 
Montenegro participates in the ministerial dialogue between the economic and finance 
ministers of the EU and the candidate countries, which aims at helping the latter to gradually 
meet the economic accession criteria and be better prepared in terms of economic reforms, 
competitiveness and job creation. The most recent meeting was held on 14 May 2024. 
Montenegro has maintained its full alignment with the EU common foreign and security 
policy and has continued contributing to EU crisis management missions and operations 
under the common security and defence policy. The Balkans Medical Task Force, in which 
Montenegro participates, benefits from a EUR 6 million 2022 support measure under the 
European Peace Facility. 
Visa liberalisation for citizens of Montenegro travelling to the Schengen area has been in 
force since December 2009. As part of the visa liberalisation monitoring mechanism, the 
Commission has been regularly assessing the progress made by the country in 
implementing reforms introduced under the visa roadmap. The Commission’s sixth report 
under the Visa Suspension Mechanism adopted in October 2023 concluded that 
Montenegro continues to take action to address the recommendations from the previous 
year’s report. A readmission agreement between the European Union and Montenegro has 
been in force since 2008. 
The Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance 2021-2027 (IPA III)14 continues to provide 
financial support to the region and finances the Economic and Investment Plan for the 
Western Balkans.  
The 2024 annual programme was adopted in May 2024 with a budget of EUR 26.6 million, 
focuses on (i) support for Montenegro on the rule of law; (ii) further alignment with the EU 
acquis and institutional capacity building; (iii) preparations for the upcoming IPA III 
operational programmes in the areas of environment and climate change and employment 
and social inclusion.  
Following approvals by the WBIF operational board Montenegro has significant support for 
upcoming infrastructure investment, notably in the areas of rail transport and environment. 
Moreover, additional EUR 100 million from IPA III have been mobilised to support the 
construction of a next section of the Bar-Boljare highway.  
 
14 Official Journal L 330, 20.9.2021 


===== PAGE 93 =====
 
92 
 
The bilateral annual programmes are complemented by a package of multi-country and 
regional programmes, supporting the environmental sector, dealing with migration, social 
housing, as well as TAIEX and competitiveness programmes together with IFIs and IOs.  
Under the Reform and Growth Facility, Montenegro could benefit from an indicative 
allocation of EUR 383.5 million, to be channelled via a Reform Agenda covering key reforms 
in four policy areas: business environment and private sector development; digitalisation 
and energy (green transition); human capital development; fundamental rights and rule of 
law. Disbursement of Union support will be conditional on compliance with the 
preconditions and delivery on reforms as set out in the Reform Agenda. 
Montenegro is also benefiting from the rural development programme IPARD III (in 
continuation of its support under IPARD II), providing a significant contribution to the 
implementation of the Economic and Investment Plan for the Western Balkans and the 
Green Agenda.  
Montenegro also continues to participate actively in cross-border cooperation programmes 
with neighbouring countries and EU Member States (Adriatic and Danube – macro regional 
strategies), as well as transnational cooperation programmes and EU programmes. To 
improve the mental health of youth and strengthen capacities in modelling the 
macroeconomic effects of green policies and investments, Montenegro is participating as 
an observer in two pilot projects under the Technical Support Instrument. 
Measures programmed under IPA III are building on and adding to the previous and ongoing 
measures from IPA II (2014-2020) programmes, which have provided significant support 
through the EU integration facility, support for participation in EU programmes, the Civil 
Society Facility and IPARD, aiming at the social and economic development of the country 
and improving the reform process of the rule of law sector, fundamental rights, public 
administration reform, and other critical sectors.  
The EU provides support via the IPA and the Foreign Policy Instrument to strengthen 
Western Balkans partners’ resilience to face hybrid threats including cyber and foreign 
information manipulation and interference. 
 


===== PAGE 94 =====
 
93 
 
ANNEX  II – STATISTICAL DATA 
STATISTICAL DATA (as of 5/09/2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Montenegro 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Basic data 
Note 
2011 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Population (thousand) 
 
620 i 
622 i 
622 i 
622 i 
621 i 
618 i 
Total area of the country (km²) 
 
13 812 w 
13 812 w 
: 
: 
: 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National accounts 
Note 
2011 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Gross domestic product (GDP) (million national currency) 
 
3 265 
4 663 
4 951 
4 186 
4 955 
5 924 
Gross domestic product (GDP) (million euro) 
 
3 265 
4 663 
4 951 
4 186 
4 955 
5 924 
GDP (euro per capita) 
 
5 270 
7 490 
7 960 
6 740 
8 000 
9 600 
GDP per capita (in purchasing power standards (PPS)) 
 
10 783 
14 587 
15 697 
13 417 
15 456 
17 577 
GDP per capita (in PPS), relative to the EU average (EU-27 = 100) 
 
42.0 
48.1 
50.0 
44.5 
47.1 
49.4 
Real GDP growth rate: change on previous year of GDP volume (%) 
 
3.2 
5.1 
4.1 
-  15.3 
13.0 
6.4 
Employment growth (national accounts data), relative to the previous year (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Labour productivity growth: growth in GDP (in volume) per person employed, relative to the 
previous year (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Unit labour cost growth, relative to the previous year (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
**3 year change (T/T-3) in the nominal unit labour cost growth index (2015 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Labour productivity per person employed: GDP (in PPS) per person employed relative to EU 
average (EU-27 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Gross value added by main sectors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries (%) 
 
9.6 
8.2 
7.9 
9.1 
8.0 
7.5 
Industry (%) 
 
12.1 
12.5 
11.9 
13.5 
12.5 
11.3 
Construction (%) 
 
5.9 
7.0 
7.9 
7.3 
5.8 
4.8 
Services (%) 
 
72.4 i 
72.4 i 
72.2 i 
70.0 i 
73.8 i 
76.3 i 
Final consumption expenditure, as a share of GDP (%) 
 
102.6 
91.9 
89.2 
103.8 
92.7 
92.5 
Gross fixed capital formation, as a share of GDP (%) 
 
19.5 
29.2 
27.3 
27.9 
22.1 
21.5 
Exports of goods and services, relative to GDP (%) 
 
42.3 
42.9 
43.8 
26.0 
42.8 
51.5 
Imports of goods and services, relative to GDP (%) 
 
64.3 
66.7 
65.0 
61.0 
62.2 
74.4 
Gross fixed capital formation by the general government sector, as a percentage of GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business 
Note 
2011 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Industrial production volume index (2015 = 100) 
 
101.8 w 
113.8 w 
106.6 w 
105.6 w 
110.8 w 
107.2 w 
Number of active enterprises (number) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Birth rate: number of enterprise births in the reference period (t) divided by the number of 
enterprises active in t (%) 
 
21.4 w 
11.2 w 
11.2 w 
8.5 w 
11.4 w 
21.6 w 


===== PAGE 95 =====
 
94 
 
Death rate: number of enterprise deaths in the reference period (t) divided by the number of 
enterprises active in t (%) 
 
: 
4.8 w 
3.3 w 
4.7 w 
4.9 w 
5.6 w 
People employed in SMEs as a share of all persons employed (within the non-financial 
business economy) (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Value added by SMEs (in the non-financial business economy) (EUR million) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Total value added (in the non-financial business economy) (EUR million) 
 
: 
2 021 w 
2 205 w 
1 819 w 
2 164 w 
2 870 w 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inflation rate 
Note 
2011 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Consumer price index (CPI), change relative to the previous year (%) 
 
: 
2.6 d 
0.5 d 
-  0.5 d 
2.5 d 
11.9 d 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Balance of payments 
Note 
2011 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Balance of payments: current account total (million euro) 
 
: 
-  793.0 
-  707.0 
- 1 091.0 
-  457.0 
-  766.0 
Balance of payments current account: trade balance (million euro) 
 
: 
- 2 050.0 
- 2 065.0 
- 1 643.0 
- 1 914.0 
- 2 671.0 
Balance of payments current account: net services (million euro) 
 
: 
935.0 
1 019.0 
176.0 
956.0 
1 317.0 
Balance of payments current account: net balance for primary income (million euro) 
 
: 
55.0 
56.0 
66.0 
103.0 
118.0 
Balance of payments current account: net balance for secondary income (million euro) 
 
: 
265.0 
284.0 
308.0 
401.0 
467.0 
Net balance for primary and secondary income: of which government transfers (million euro) 
 
: 
34.0 
49.0 
51.0 
66.0 
41.0 
**3 year backward moving average of the current account balance relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
-  16.4 
-  15.8 
-  19.1 
-  16.5 
-  16.1 
**Five year change in share of world exports of goods and services (%) 
 
: 
19.0 
26.8 
-  31.4 
4.6 
17.7 
Net balance (inward - outward) of foreign direct investment (FDI) (million euro) 
 
389.1 w 
323.0 i 
345.0 i 
470.5 w 
581.6 w 
782.6 w 
Foreign direct investment (FDI) abroad (million euro) 
 
12.3 w 
92.0 
67.0 
-  4.5 w 
9.3 w 
49.9 w 
of which FDI of the reporting economy in the EU-27 countries (million euro) 
 
: 
78.0 
1.0 
-  2.0 w 
-  7.8 w 
8.3 w 
Foreign direct investment (FDI) in the reporting economy (million euro) 
 
401.4 w 
415.0 
412.0 
466.0 w 
590.9 w 
832.6 w 
of which FDI of the EU-27 countries in the reporting economy (million euro) 
 
: 
19.0 
41.0 
90.9 w 
172.4 w 
223.6 w 
**Net international investment position, relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
-  168.5 w 
-  166.3 w 
-  205.0 w 
-  165.4 w 
-  130.9 w 
Year on year rate of change in gross inflow of remittances (in national currency) from migrant 
workers (%) 
 
5.7 iw 
4.9 i 
4.8 i 
6.3 i 
6.8 i 
7.4 i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Public finance 
Note 
2011 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
General government deficit / surplus, relative to GDP (%) 
 
-  5.4 w 
-  4.6 w 
-  2.0 w 
-  10.7 ew 
: 
: 
General government gross debt relative to GDP (%) 
 
45.4 w 
70.1 ew 
76.5 w 
103.1 w 
: 
: 
Total  government revenues, as a percentage of GDP (%) 
 
39.4 w 
42.2 w 
43.4 w 
43.7 ew 
: 
: 
Total government expenditure, as a percentage of GDP (%) 
 
44.8 w 
46.2 w 
45.4 w 
54.4 ew 
: 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Financial indicators 
Note 
2011 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Gross external debt of the whole economy, relative to GDP (%) 
 
145.9 iw 
164.7 i 
167.4 i 
221.6 i 
191.7 i 
158.4 i 
Gross external debt of the whole economy, relative to total exports (%) 
 
346.7 w 
381.7 w 
381.8 w 
852.4 w 
447.6 w 
307.3 w 
Money supply: M1 (banknotes, coins, overnight deposits, million euro) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Total credit by monetary financial institutions to residents (consolidated) (million euro) 
1) 
1 951.6 w 
2 528.0 w 
2 727.3 w 
2 841.0 w 
2 884.2 w 
: 
**Annual change in financial sector liabilities (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 


===== PAGE 96 =====
 
95 
 
**Private debt, consolidated, relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Interest rates: day-to-day money rate, per annum (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Euro exchange rates: average of period (1 euro = … national currency) 
 
1 w 
1 w 
1 w 
1 w 
1 w 
1 w 
Trade-weighted effective exchange rate index, 42 countries (2015 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
**3 year change (T/T-3) in the trade-weighted effective exchange rate index, 42 countries 
(2015 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Value of reserve assets (including gold) (million euro) 
 
303.5 w 
202.0 
316.0 
376.0 
8.0 
164.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
External trade in goods 
Note 
2011 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Value of imports: all goods, all partners (million euro) 
 
1 823 
2 554 
2 601 
2 105 
2 504 
3 540 
Value of exports: all goods, all partners (million euro) 
 
454 
400 
416 
366 
437 
700 
Trade balance: all goods, all partners (million euro) 
 
- 1 369 
- 2 154 
- 2 185 
- 1 739 
- 2 067 
- 2 840 
Terms of trade (export price index / import price index * 100) (number) 
 
101.5 iw 
100.7 iw 
99.1 iw 
94.4 iw 
99.8 iw 
110.6 iw 
Share of exports to EU-27 countries in value of total exports (%) 
 
59.2 iw 
43.1 iw 
37.0 iw 
37.7 iw 
31.1 iw 
30.3 iw 
Share of imports from EU-27 countries in value of total imports (%) 
 
43.5 iw 
47.1 iw 
47.0 iw 
44.2 iw 
45.7 iw 
44.3 iw 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Demography 
Note 
2011 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Crude rate of natural change of population (natural growth rate): number of births minus 
deaths (per thousand inhabitants) 
 
2.2 
1.2 
1.0 
-  0.3 
-  3.4 
-  0.1 
Infant mortality rate deaths of children under one year of age (per thousand live births) 
 
4.4 
1.7 
2.4 
2.8 
1.4 
: 
Life expectancy at birth: male (years) 
 
73.3 
74.5 
74.0 
73.2 
70.8 
: 
Life expectancy at birth: female (years) 
 
78.8 
79.3 
79.5 
78.8 
77.0 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Labour market 
Note 
2011 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Economic activity rate for persons aged 20–64: proportion of the population aged 20–64 that 
is economically active (%) 
 
63.0 
70.5 
71.8 
67.2 
64.7 w 
: 
*Employment rate for persons aged 20–64: proportion of the population aged 20–64 that are 
in employment (%) 
 
50.7 
59.8 
60.8 
55.2 
54.2 w 
: 
Male employment rate for persons aged 20–64 (%) 
 
57.0 
66.7 
67.5 
61.7 
59.8 w 
: 
Female employment rate for persons aged 20–64 (%) 
 
44.4 
52.9 
54.2 
48.8 
48.7 w 
: 
Employment rate for persons aged 55–64: proportion of the population aged 55–64 that are 
in employment (%) 
 
33.8 
46.6 
50.1 
44.2 
41.1 w 
: 
Employment by main sectors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries (%) 
 
5.5 i 
8.0 i 
7.1 i 
7.5 i 
6.4 w 
: 
Industry (%) 
 
13.6 i 
9.9 i 
9.5 i 
10.1 i 
10.2 w 
: 
Construction (%) 
 
6.0 i 
9.0 i 
9.9 i 
8.3 i 
6.7 w 
: 
Services (%) 
 
74.9 i 
72.5 i 
73.1 i 
73.5 i 
76.7 w 
: 
People employed in the public sector as a share of total employment, persons aged 20–64 
(%) 
2) 
35.3 w 
31.7 w 
29.3 w 
30.5 w 
32.7 w 
: 
People employed in the private sector as a share of total employment, persons aged 20–64 
(%) 
2) 3) 
4) 
48.5 w 
63.9 bw 
66.5 w 
65.6 w 
63.7 w 
: 


===== PAGE 97 =====
 
96 
 
Unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force that is unemployed (%) 
 
19.7 
15.2 
15.2 
17.9 
16.6 w 
: 
Male unemployment rate (%) 
 
19.3 
15.3 
14.7 
17.5 
17.1 w 
: 
Female unemployment rate (%) 
 
20.1 
15.1 
15.7 
18.4 
15.9 w 
: 
Youth unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force aged 15–24 that is unemployed (%) 
 
36.6 
29.4 
25.2 
36.0 
37.1 w 
: 
Long-term unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force that has been unemployed for 
12 months or more (%) 
 
15.7 
11.4 
12.0 
13.4 
11 w 
: 
Unemployment rate for persons (aged 25–64) having completed at most lower secondary 
education (ISCED levels 0-2) (%) 
 
30.9 
21.0 
26.9 
35.2 
31 w 
: 
Unemployment rate for persons (aged 25–64) having completed tertiary education (ISCED 
levels 5-8) (%) 
 
12.1 
10.0 
11.0 
12.0 
11.5 w 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social cohesion 
Note 
2011 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Average nominal monthly wages and salaries (national currency) 
 
479 w 
511 w 
515 w 
524 w 
532 w 
712 w 
Index of real wages and salaries (index of nominal wages and salaries divided by the 
inflation index) (2016 = 100) 
 
104 w 
98 w 
98 w 
100 w 
99 w 
117 w 
GINI coefficient 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Poverty gap 
 
: 
35.3 
33.1 
28.2 
29.5 
29.5 
*Early leavers from education and training: proportion of the population aged 18–24 with at 
most lower secondary education who are not in further education or training (%) 
 
7.2 
4.6 
5.0 
3.6 
6.7 w 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Standard of living 
Note 
2011 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Number of passenger cars relative to population size (number per thousand population) 
 
277.0 
332.0 
350.0 
338.0 
358.0 
369.0 
Number of mobile phone subscriptions relative to population size (number per thousand 
population) 
 
1 875.0 bw 
1 822.8 w 
1 849.9 w 
1 736.8 w 
1 804.4 w 
2 062.6 w 
Mobile broadband penetration (per 100 inhabitants) 
 
10.4 w 
8.8 w 
8.0 w 
7.7 w 
7.7 w 
8.5 w 
Fixed broadband penetration (per 100 inhabitants) 
 
13 w 
25 w 
29 w 
30 w 
30 w 
32 w 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Infrastructure 
Note 
2011 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Density of railway network (lines in operation per thousand km²) 
 
: 
18.0 i 
18.0 i 
18.0 i 
18.0 i 
18.0 i 
Length of motorways (kilometres) 
 
: 
m 
m 
0 
0 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Education, innovation and research 
Note 
2011 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Public expenditure on education relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
*Gross domestic expenditure on R&D relative to GDP (%) 
 
0.31 
0.50 
0.36 iw 
: 
: 
: 
Government budget appropriations or outlays on R&D (GBAORD), as a percentage of GDP 
(%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Percentage of households who have internet access at home (%) 
 
: 
72.2 
74.3 
80.3 
80.8 
81.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environment 
Note 
2011 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
*Index of greenhouse gas emissions,  CO2 equivalent (1990 = 100) 
 
85.0 w 
76.3 w 
78.5 w 
75.4 w 
75.5 w 
: 


===== PAGE 98 =====
 
97 
 
Energy intensity of the economy (kg of oil equivalent per 1 000 euro GDP at 2015 constant 
prices) 
 
328.9 
259.5 
258.2 
280.3 
265.0 
241.9 
Electricity generated from renewable sources relative to gross electricity consumption (%) 
 
41.6 
52.4 
53.6 
61.5 
60.5 
63.2 
Road share of inland freight transport (based on tonne-km) (%) 
5) 
43.1 w 
55.7 w 
45.4 w 
41.8 w 
65.1 w 
47.4 w 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Energy 
Note 
2011 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Primary production of all energy products (thousand TOE) 
 
721 
728 
736 
726 
749 
743 
Primary production of crude oil (thousand TOE) 
 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Primary production of solid fuels (thousand TOE) 
 
434 
362 
396 
400 
371 
416 
Primary production of gas (thousand TOE) 
 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net imports of all energy products (thousand TOE) 
 
411 i 
334 i 
365 i 
280 i 
340 i 
309 i 
Gross inland energy consumption (thousand TOE) 
 
1 134 
1 074 
1 112 
1 023 
1 093 
1 062 
Gross electricity generation (GWh) 
 
2 656 
3 811 
3 433 
3 381 
3 777 
3 322 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture 
Note 
2011 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Agricultural production volume index of goods and services (at producer prices) (2015 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Utilised agricultural area (thousand hectares) 
 
222.9 
256.8 p 
257.5 p 
258.0 p 
255.6 p 
253.7 p 
Livestock numbers: live bovine animals (thousand heads, end of period) 
 
: 
83.3 p 
81.4 p 
77.9 p 
71.2 p 
70.8 p 
Livestock numbers: live swine (thousand heads, end of period) 
 
: 
23.6 p 
23.0 p 
25.8 p 
24.3 p 
24.5 p 
Livestock numbers: live sheep and live goats (thousand heads, end of period) 
 
: 
216.0 pi 
210.8 pi 
204.4 pi 
195.0 pi 
190.5 pi 
Raw milk available on farms (thousand tonnes) 
 
: 
181.5 p 
178.0 p 
: 
: 
: 
Harvested crop production: cereals (including rice) (thousand tonnes) 
 
6.6 
8.0 p 
7.6 p 
7.3 p 
7.1 p 
7.2 p 
Harvested crop production: sugar beet (thousand tonnes) 
 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Harvested crop production: vegetables (thousand tonnes) 
 
29.3 
42.3 p 
40.1 p 
39.4 p 
40.9 p 
40.9 p 
 
Source: Eurostat and/or the statistical authorities in Montenegro 
 
: = not available 
b = break in series 
d =  definition differs 
e = estimated value 
p = provisional 
i = Eurostat estimate 
m = missing value / data cannot exist 
w= data supplied by and under the responsibility of the national statistical authority and published on an "as is" basis and 
without any assurance as regards their quality and adherence to EU statistical methodology 
* = Europe 2020 indicator 
** = Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure (MIP) indicator 
Footnotes: 


===== PAGE 99 =====
 
98 
 
1) 
Loans include total banks' loans granted to non MFI residents and other claims (factoring and forfeiting, claims on 
outstanding bills of acceptance, guarantees and bills of exchange). 
2) 
Data refer to number of employees in the public sector as a share of the total number of persons employed. 
3) 
Comprises data of private companies or enterprises, entrepreneurs, private households and NGO. 
4) 
Break in series as previously only employees were answering this question; Since 2018 all employed persons  are giving 
answer to this question. 
5) 
Total freight traffic (national territory and international transport). 


===== PAGE 100 =====
 
99 
 
 
 
