===== PAGE 1 =====
EN 
 
 EN 
 
 
EUROPEAN 
COMMISSION 
 
Brussels, 12.10.2022  
SWD(2022) 335 final 
 
COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT 
Montenegro 2022 Report 
Accompanying the document 
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the 
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions 
2022 Communication on EU Enlargement policy         
         
 
{COM(2022) 528 final} - {SWD(2022) 332 final} - {SWD(2022) 333 final} -
 {SWD(2022) 334 final} - {SWD(2022) 336 final} - {SWD(2022) 337 final} -
 {SWD(2022) 338 final} 
 


===== PAGE 2 =====
 
1 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION................................................................................................................. 3 
1.1  
CONTEXT ................................................................................................................. 3 
1.2  
SUMMARY OF THE REPORT  ..................................................................................... 4 
1.3.  
 STATE OF PLAY OF THE ACCESSION NEGOTIATIONS .............................................. 8 
2. CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS ................. 9 
2.1. 
FUNCTIONING OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 
REFORM ................................................................................................................... 9 
2.1.1 Democracy ......................................................................................................... 9 
2.1.2. Public administration reform .......................................................................... 15 
2.2. RULE OF LAW AND FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS.................................................................. 18 
2.2.1 
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights ............................................ 18 
2.2.2 
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security .................................................. 45 
2.3. ECONOMIC CRITERIA .................................................................................................... 62 
2.3.1. The existence of a functioning market economy ............................................ 62 
2.3.2. The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the 
Union .......................................................................................................... 69 
2.4. PUBLIC PROCUREMENT, STATISTICS, FINANCIAL CONTROL ........................................ 71 
Chapter 5: Public procurement ................................................................................. 71 
Chapter 18: Statistics ................................................................................................ 73 
Chapter 32: Financial control ................................................................................... 74 
3. GOOD NEIGHBOURLY RELATIONS AND REGIONAL COOPERATION ........... 77 
4. 
ABILITY TO ASSUME THE OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP ................. 79 
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET ........................................................................................ 79 
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods ......................................................................... 79 
Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers ......................................................... 81 
Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services ........................ 82 
Chapter 4 - Free movement of capital ...................................................................... 82 
Chapter 6: Company law .......................................................................................... 84 
Chapter 7: Intellectual property law ......................................................................... 85 
Chapter 8: Competition policy .................................................................................. 86 
Chapter 9: Financial services .................................................................................... 88 
Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection ........................................................... 89 
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH ................................................ 92 
Chapter 10: Digital transformation and media ......................................................... 92 


===== PAGE 3 =====
 
2 
 
Chapter 16: Taxation ................................................................................................ 94 
Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy ............................................................. 95 
Chapter 19: Social Policy and employment .............................................................. 97 
Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy ............................................................ 99 
Chapter 25: Science and Research .......................................................................... 100 
Chapter 26: Education and culture .......................................................................... 102 
Chapter 29: Customs union ..................................................................................... 105 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY ............................ 106 
Chapter 14: Transport policy .................................................................................. 107 
Chapter 15: Energy ................................................................................................. 108 
Chapter 21: Trans-European networks ................................................................... 110 
Chapter 27: Environment and climate change ........................................................ 111 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION ................................................ 114 
Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development ..................................................... 114 
Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy ............................... 115 
Chapter 13: Fisheries .............................................................................................. 117 
Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments ............... 118 
Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions .................................................... 119 
CLUSTER 6: EXTERNAL RELATIONS .................................................................................. 120 
Chapter 30: External relations ................................................................................ 120 
Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy .................................................. 122 
ANNEX I – RELATIONS BETWEEN THE EU AND MONTENEGRO ...................... 124 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 4 =====
 
3 
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
1.1  
CONTEXT  
Accession negotiations with Montenegro were opened in June 2012. To date, 33 negotiating 
chapters have been opened, of which three have been provisionally closed. Montenegro 
accepted the revised enlargement methodology. Montenegro continued to implement the 
Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) and meetings of the joint bodies under the 
agreement took place at regular intervals.  
Overall progress in the accession negotiations depends on progress in the area of rule of law, 
as per the requirements set out in the Negotiating Framework as well as in the revised 
methodology formally accepted by Montenegro in the Intergovernmental Conference held on 
22 June 2021. Progress towards meeting the interim benchmarks set in the rule of law 
Chapters 23 and 24 is key to achieving further progress in the negotiations overall, as no 
further chapters will be provisionally closed before this milestone is reached. The 14th 
Intergovernmental Conference held on 13 December 2021 and the SA Council held on 14 
July 2022 provided political steer on accelerating work to meet that milestone. In order for 
Montenegro to take further steps forward in the accession path, it was urged to address all 
remaining gaps in the areas of freedom of expression and media freedom, the fight against 
corruption and organised crime, and to accelerate and deepen reforms on the independence, 
professionalism and accountability of the judiciary. The pace of this work will be determined 
by Montenegro.  
The Montenegrin authorities’ political commitment to the strategic goal of EU integration 
and their ambition to move forward in the accession negotiations based on continuing reform 
progress have been consistently stated as the country’s key priority. The failure to build 
consensus on key matters of national interest continued and caused two governments to fall 
on votes of no-confidence. Political volatility, government instability and tensions have 
stalled decision-making processes and reform implementation.  
Montenegro’s continued full alignment with the EU’s foreign and security policy, including 
EU restrictive measures following Russia’s unprovoked aggression against Ukraine, its vocal 
support for EU initiatives at the UN in response to this aggression, as well as for international 
law and a rules-based international order, is commendable. This is a strong signal of the 
country’s strategic orientation and commitment to the goal of EU accession. 
Political commitment, credible engagement and consensus building by all relevant 
institutions and actors in carrying out Montenegro’s EU reform agenda remain fundamental. 
It is important that all political actors exercise their responsibility to participate in political 
debates in Parliament and engage in constructive coordination on all relevant EU-related 
legislative initiatives. 
The COVID-19 pandemic continued throughout the reporting period. In spring 2022, 
Montenegro lifted partially the restrictions, introduced to limit the severity of the pandemic. 
During the reporting period, Montenegro adopted fiscal measures to mitigate the severe 
economic and social impact of the crisis.  
 


===== PAGE 5 =====
 
4 
 
1.2  
SUMMARY OF THE REPORT1  
As regards the political criteria, political tensions, polarisation, the absence of constructive 
engagement between political parties and the failure to build consensus on key matters of 
national interest continued and caused two fractious governments to fall on votes of no-
confidence. The proper functioning of Montenegrin institutions has been affected by political 
volatility, government instability and tensions within the ruling majorities, stalling decision-
making processes and reform implementation. The main judicial bodies, including the 
Constitutional Court, have been operating in an incomplete composition due to the 
Parliament’s inability to elect new members, thus undermining their proper functioning. As 
of mid-September the Constitutional Court was unable to fulfil its role due to the absence of a 
quorum, amplifying political uncertainty. 
The conclusion of the Fundamental Agreement with the Serbian Orthodox Church had an 
impact on the political atmosphere and raised further tensions. Overall, the governments and 
the Parliament failed to demonstrate in practice their engagement as regards the EU-related 
reform agenda. 
There was no progress with regard to a comprehensive reform of the electoral legal and 
institutional framework, including on the Organization for Security and Co-operation in 
Europe (OSCE) Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) 
recommendations, following the observation mission of the 2020 parliamentary elections. 
The Parliamentary Committee for a comprehensive electoral reform was not operational from 
June until November 2021 and  met only twice in 2022, before its mandate come to an end in 
July 2022. Local elections took place in five municipalities. In May 2022, the Parliament 
adopted amendments to the Law on Local Self-Government allowing to hold all remaining 
2022 local elections on the same day. In July, the Constitutional Court assessed these 
amendments as unconstitutional. A credible, independent and effective institutional response 
to the so called ‘envelope affair’ remains to be ensured. 
The work of the Parliament has been marked by boycotts of the ruling majority and of the 
opposition, changes of governments and by the change of two consecutive Speakers in the 
process. The legislation-making process was significantly affected. There was no credible 
political dialogue and constructive engagement by political parties with a view to enhancing 
parliamentary accountability and government oversight. Government and Parliament 
cooperation should be further regulated to enhance Parliament’s participation in and 
oversight of the accession process.  
The Parliament continued to strengthen its transparency, by establishing several citizen-
oriented services. The capacity of Parliament to integrate and oversight gender equality issues 
needs to be enhanced.  
The role of civil society is recognised and promoted, although the current legal and 
institutional framework needs to be further improved to strengthen the consultation and 
cooperation mechanisms between state institutions and civil society in the context of the EU 
accession process. 
                                                            
1 This report covers the period from June 2021 to June 2022. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from the government of Montenegro, the EU Member States, European Parliament 
reports and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. This also includes the 
results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular on the rule of law. 
The report uses the following assessment scales to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of 
preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made 
during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some 
progress, good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have been used. 


===== PAGE 6 =====
 
5 
 
Montenegro is moderately prepared as regards public administration reform. Overall, 
limited progress was made, including the adoption of the new 2022-2026 strategy for public 
administration reform. Conversely, the effects of the reorganisation of the public 
administration and the amendments to the Law on civil servants and state employees adopted 
in 2021 continued to be felt, with staff changes, a loss of know-how on EU accession 
process-related matters and an overall slowing of the pace of reforms. The lowered 
requirements introduced by these amendments are a source of continuing concern with regard 
to the merit-based recruitment, competence and independence of civil servants. Furthermore, 
draft amendments of the Law on local self-government would similarly lower such 
requirements at the local level. Amendments to the Law on access to information have yet to 
be adopted by Parliament. Effective lines of accountability within the administration are still 
to be established. Strong political will is needed to effectively address issues related to merit-
based recruitments, optimisation of the state administration and implementation of 
managerial accountability. 
Montenegro remains moderately prepared when it comes to its judicial system. Limited 
progress was achieved overall during the reporting period. The implementation of key 
judicial reforms remains stalled. Certain long-pending high-level judicial appointments took 
place, while several others, including at the Constitutional Court (for which a qualified 
majority in Parliament is required) are still pending. Concerns remain over the institutional 
performance and consolidation of independent Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils. The track 
record on judicial accountability remains limited. The judiciary’s effective independence, 
integrity, accountability and professionalism need to be further strengthened, including by 
implementing the relevant constitutional and legal framework and by adopting legislative 
changes in line with European standards. The judiciary’s efficiency also needs to be 
strengthened. The adoption of a new strategy for the rationalisation of the judicial network is 
still pending, as is the implementation of the ICT strategy for the judiciary. Montenegro 
continues to make progress on the domestic handling of war crimes.  
Montenegro has achieved some level of preparation in the fight against corruption. Limited 
progress was achieved during the reporting period, with last year’s recommendations only 
partially met. The track record on prevention of corruption further improved, in particular due 
to the positive trend in the work of the Anti-Corruption Agency. However, more needs to be 
done to ensure the Agency’s integrity, impartiality and accountability, and to improve its 
tangible results and public trust, in line with the recommendations of the peer review mission 
conducted in 2021. To demonstrate a credible criminal justice response, Montenegro still 
must improve its track record of investigations, prosecutions and final convictions in the fight 
against corruption, including high-level corruption. Furthermore, the legal and insitutional 
framework must be improved in line with the EU acquis and European standards, including 
for the effective use of financial investigations and and asset seizure and confiscation in such 
cases. The sectors most vulnerable to corruption require targeted risk assessments and 
dedicated action.  
In the fight against organised crime, Montenegro has some level of preparation/is 
moderately prepared. Some progress was made in addressing last year’s recommendations, in 
particular as regards the efficiency of criminal investigations. The full use of special 
investigative measures was restored. Legislative changes introduced safeguards against 
political influence over the appointment or dismissal of the Head of the police. A register of 
beneficial ownership was created. The administrative framework on firearms was improved 
and a new strategy on the prevention of terrorism, money laundering and the financing of 
terrorism was adopted. Some key figures in organised crime groups were arrested and another 
record of drug seizures was reached. The first joint investigation team with a third country 


===== PAGE 7 =====
 
6 
 
was launched. The number of final convictions in organised crime cases is on the rise. 
However, the track record of court decisions on tobacco smuggling and money laundering, 
the use of financial investigations and the capacity to confiscate the proceeds of crime needs 
to be strengthened. Montenegro has yet to address some systemic deficiencies that exist 
across the board in its criminal justice system, including the way organised crime cases are 
handled in courts. This will require a more deterrent sentencing policy and a revision of the 
use of plea bargains in organised and serious crime cases. 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of fundamental rights. The legislative and 
institutional framework is largely in place and Montenegro continues to meet its international 
obligations on human rights. However, additional efforts remain needed to implement it fully. 
On freedom of expression, Montenegro benefits from a pluralistic media environment and 
has achieved some level of preparation. Limited progress was made on last year’s 
recommendations. The legal framework on the protection of journalists and other media 
workers was improved thanks to the adoption of amendments to the Criminal Code laying 
down more stringent penalties against attacks and threats against journalists and obstructing 
or preventing them from performing their work. However, the lack of effective judicial 
follow-up on important old cases remains a matter of serious concern. The revision of the 
legal framework and the drafting of a new media strategy remain pending, in order to ensure 
their mutual consistency and full alignment with the EU acquis and relevant European 
standards. Sustained efforts are needed to counter disinformation and limit the effects of 
online harassment and hate speech, without disproportionately limiting freedom of 
expression. The public broadcaster RTCG continued to produce politically balanced and 
diverse content. Deep political polarisation of the media scene persisted, while growing 
competition from big regional media placed additional strain on the local media market. 
On the economic criteria, Montenegro has made good progress and is moderately 
prepared in developing a functioning market economy. After experiencing a sharp recession 
in 2020, the economy recorded a strong rebound in 2021 and kept growing at a steady pace in 
the first half of 2022 as the removal of COVID-19 restrictions buoyed both domestic and 
external demand. The recovery led to surging revenues and a very large improvement in the 
budget balance. The fallout from Russia’s war against Ukraine has been limited so far, 
despite these two countries’ very significant contribution to Montenegro’s tourism in the past. 
Driven by surging global commodity prices, inflation increased significantly. The 
government adopted an ambitious fiscal reform programme (called ‘Europe Now’) to support 
the post-pandemic recovery and provided fiscal stimulus measures easing the burden on 
households from rising energy and food prices. External imbalances decreased significantly 
thanks to the rebound of tourism, while the state of the labour market started to improve, even 
if structural problems persist. The banking system remained stable and non-performing loans 
did not increase significantly in 2022 after the expiry in 2021 of the loan moratorium adopted 
in the context of the COVID-19 crisis. 
Montenegro has made some progress and is moderately prepared to cope with competitive 
pressure and market forces within the EU. The last two governments worked to improve 
innovation capacities and to set the basis for a green and digital transition in an effort to 
diversify Montenegro’s narrow production. In particular, modern telecommunications and 
ambitious green energy projects are being deployed. However, infrastructure gaps persist, as 
the country’s administrative and financial capacities to implement major public investments 
remains limited. The education system still faces numerous challenges over a chronic 
shortage of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) graduates. In addition, 
the low value added of domestic products, the small size of local companies and low level of 


===== PAGE 8 =====
 
7 
 
participation in exports represent obstacles for increasing the productivity and 
competitiveness of local firms. 
On good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation, Montenegro generally maintains 
good bilateral relations with other enlargement countries in the region and with neighbouring 
EU Member States, marked by continued cooperation and several high-level visits. Relations 
with Serbia remain challenging but both sides are signalling more willingness to reset 
relations and work toward adressing open issues. In general, Montenegro actively participates 
in regional cooperation. 
On Montenegro’s ability to assume the obligations of EU membership, the country 
continued the work on alignment with the EU acquis in many areas, however overall the 
progress made was limited. 
The cluster on the internal market is key for Montenegro’s preparations for the EU’s 
requirements in this area and is of high relevance for early integration and the development of 
the Common Regional Market. All nine chapters are open, with closing benchmarks that 
remain to be fulfilled in each chapter. Progress was achieved in several areas within the 
cluster, particularly on: (i) market surveillance, accreditation and standardisation; (ii) 
stepping up the Employment Agency’s capacity on the European network of employment 
services; (iii) continued alignment with the Services Directive; (iv) legislation on accounting; 
(v) acquis alignment on intellectual property rights and (vi) State aid transparency and 
ordering recovery of unlawful State aid. The stability of Montenegro’s banking sector also 
advanced, as did legislative alignment on consumer protection and the adoption of 
implementing legislation on health protection.  
The competitiveness and inclusive growth cluster and the reforms concerned have 
significant links to Montenegro’s economic reform programme. All eight chapters are open, 
with closing benchmarks set in all but two, namely Chapters 25 (science and research) and 26 
(education and culture) both of which are provisionally closed. Closing benchmarks remain 
to be fulfilled in each of the other six chapters. Some progress was achieved in various areas, 
namely on the alignment with the Broadband Cost Reduction Directive, on tax legislation and 
on administrative cooperation and mutual assistance. There was also progress on further 
implementation of the revised industrial policy. By contrast, there was slow progress on 
preparations for accession to the Convention on a Common Transit Procedure, on 
implementing actions envisaged in the 2018-2022 trade facilitation strategy, and on 
implementing the action plan for alignment with the EU acquis on economic and monetary 
policies. 
The green agenda and sustainable connectivity cluster is at the heart of the Green Agenda 
for the Western Balkans and closely linked to Montenegro’s economic reform programme 
and the Commission’s Economic and Investment Plan. All four chapters are open, with 
closing benchmarks that remain to be fulfilled in each chapter. Some progress was achieved 
on creating a functioning day-ahead energy market and on preparing for membership of the 
Paris Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control. There was limited progress on 
the review and implementation of the transport development strategy; on water management 
and by improved climate change reporting. 
The cluster on resources, agriculture and cohesion comprises policies linked to EU 
structural funds and to developing capacity to assume the responsibilities of a future Member 
State. It also comprises some of the key policy areas crucial for ensuring sustainable food 
systems and helping rural communities to develop and diversify economically. All five 
chapters are open, with closing benchmarks that remain to be fulfilled in each chapter. 


===== PAGE 9 =====
 
8 
 
Progress was achieved in various areas, notably in agriculture, food and fisheries, where there 
was further support for agricultural establishments and rural food companies to align with the 
EU standards, and in implementing IPARD. On financial and budgetary provisions, progress 
was achieved through improved coordination and management of own resources. 
On the external relations cluster, Montenegro has provisionally closed Chapter 30 and has to 
fulfil the single closing benchmark on Chapter 31. Montenegro continues full alignment with 
the EU’s common foreign and security policy, including with the EU’s restrictive measures 
following Russia’s unprovoked aggression against Ukraine. It also coordinates its positions 
with those of the EU, including within the WTO and maintains good cooperation with 
international organisations. Progress can be noted on the adoption of the Law on export 
control of dual-use goods, in line with the EU acquis, and the ratification of Central 
European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) Additional Protocol 6. Montenegro’s voting 
patterns on cybercrime at the United Nations are fully convergent with the position taken by 
the EU and its Member States.In the area of migration, Montenegro signed a cooperation 
roadmap with the European Asylum Support Office (now the EU Agency for Asylum) and 
joined the European Migration Network, an EU network of migration and asylum experts, as 
an observer member. The processing time for asylum applications was reduced. 
Montenegro’s visa policy is not fully aligned with that of the EU and Montenegro has not yet 
terminated its investor citizenship programme, despite previous recommendations and 
commitments. Montenegro is the Western Balkan partner hosting propotionally the highest 
number of Ukrainian nationals having fled the war,. It adopted a decision granting one-year 
temporary protection to people fleeing Ukraine, under which more than 5 552 Ukrainians, 
mostly women and children, have registered so far. 
1.3.  
 STATE OF PLAY OF THE ACCESSION NEGOTIATIONS  
CLUSTERS 
Chapters/areas  
Date chapter opened / closed with 
interim or closing benchmarks  
Fundamentals 
 
All chapters open 
23 – Judiciary and fundamental rights  
24 – Justice, freedom, security  
  5 – Public procurement  
18 – Statistics   
32 – Financial control 
… Economic criteria 
… Functioning of democratic Institutions  
… Public administration reform 
December 2013  
December 2013  
December 2013  
December 2014 
June 2014  
 
- 
- 
Internal market 
 
All chapters open 
 1 – Free movement of goods   
 2 – Freedom of movement for workers   
 3 – Right of establishment and freedom to  
     establish services  
 4 – Free movement of capital 
 6 – Company law  
 7 – Intellectual property rights  
 8 – Competition   
 9 – Financial services  
28 – Consumer and health protection 
June 2017  
December 2017  
December 2017  
… 
June 2014  
December 2013  
March 2014  
June 2020  
June 2015  
December 2014   


===== PAGE 10 =====
 
9 
 
Competitiveness and 
inclusive growth 
 
 
All chapters open  ch.25  
and 26 provisionally 
closed 
10 – Digital transformation and media  
16 – Taxation  
17 – Economic and monetary  
19 – Social policy and employment  
20 – Enterprise and industrial policy  
25 – Science and research 
  
26 – Education and culture 
  
29 – Customs union  
March 2014  
March 2015  
June 2018  
December 2016  
December 2013  
December 2012 (opened and closed –  
no closing benchmarks);  
April 2013 (opened and closed – no 
closing benchmarks) 
December 2014   
Green agenda and 
sustainable connectivity 
All chapters open 
14 – Transport policy 
15 – Energy  
21 – Trans-European networks 
27 – Environment and climate change  
December 2015  
December 2015  
June 2015  
December 2018  
Resources, agriculture 
and cohesion 
 
All chapters open  
 
11 – Agriculture and rural development  
12 – Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary 
policy 
13 – Fisheries  
22 – Regional policy and coordination of  
      structural instruments  
33 – Financial and budgetary provisions  
December 2016  
June 2016  
June 2016  
June 2017  
… 
December 2014  
External relations 
Both chapters open, ch.30 
provisionally closed  
30 – External relations  
 
31 – Foreign, security & defence policy  
March 2015 – June 2017 
provisionally closed 
June 2014   
Not part of a cluster: chapters 34 Institutions, and 35 Other issues are currently not applicable for 
Montenegro. 
 
2. CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
2.1. 
FUNCTIONING OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 
REFORM  
2.1.1 Democracy 
In Montenegro, polarisation, the absence of constructive engagement between political forces 
and the failure to build consensus on key matters of national interest continued and caused 
two governments to fall on votes of no-confidence. The proper functioning of Montenegrin 
institutions has been affected by political volatility, government instability and tensions 
within the ruling majorities, stalling decision-making processes and reform implementation. 
The main judicial bodies, including the Constitutional Court, have been operating in an 
incomplete composition due to the Parliament’s inability to elect new members, thus 
undermining their proper functioning. As of mid-September the Constitutional Court was 
unable to fulfil its role due to the absence of a quorum. No credible efforts have been made to 
overcome the societal and political polarisation, which culminated during the enthronement 
of the Metropolitan of the Serbian Orthodox Church (SOC) in September 2021 and the 


===== PAGE 11 =====
 
10 
 
signing of the Fundamental Agreement with SOC in the summer 2022. There was no inter-
party dialogue to address reconciliation and key matters of national interest. Overall, limited 
progress was made on the EU-related reform agenda. 
Elections 
There was no progress with regard to a comprehensive reform of the electoral legal and 
institutional framework, including on the OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, following the 
observation mission of the 2020 parliamentary elections. The Parliamentary Committee for a 
comprehensive electoral reform had limited activity and its mandate come to an end in July 
2022. Local elections took place in five municipalities. In May 2022, the Parliament adopted 
amendments to the Law on Local Self-Government allowing to hold all remaining 2022 local 
elections on the same day. In July, the Constitutional Court assessed these amendments as 
unconstitutional. A credible, independent and effective institutional response to the so called 
‘envelope affair’ remains to be ensured. 
The Parliamentary Committee for a comprehensive electoral reform resumed its activities in 
November 2021, after the return of four opposition Members of Parliament (MP) who had 
suspended their participation in June 2021. On 30 December 2021, upon a decision jointly 
supported by all nine parliamentary MP groups, the Parliament extended the Committee’s 
mandate until 31 July 2022, but issued no further extensions. There were only two sessions of 
the Committee in 2022.  
In May 2022, amendments made to the Law on Local Self-Government stipulated that local 
elections in Podgorica and 13 other municipalities should be held on the same day, no later 
than 30 October. The Democratic Front (DF) political group and two Non-Governmental 
Organisations (NGOs) submitted a complaint to the Constitutional Court on the legality of 
the Law and in July, the Constitutional Court assessed these amendments as unconstitutional. 
Nevertheless, the President called for elections in all relevant municipalities for 23 October.  
In August, the Parliament passed amendments to the Laws on the territorial organisation of 
Montenegro and the Capital City, which envisages the establishment of a new municipality of 
Zeta This reduces the number of voters in Podgorica. The Parliament however did not 
appoint a Municipal Election Commission (MEC) for the new municipality, in the absence of 
a MEC, the institution responsible for organizing the elections, they cannot be appropriately 
held. 
The majority of recommendations of OSCE/ODIHR following the August 2020 
parliamentary elections, as well as a number of previously pending OSCE/ODIHR 
recommendations, remain unaddressed, including those related to an audit of the voter 
register, measures against the misuse of state resources, as well as certain limitations of 
suffrage rights. In addition to addressing the OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, the 
Parliamentary Committee for electoral reform had a mandate to propose new laws on election 
of MPs and councillors, voter’s registry, financing of political entities and electoral 
campaigns, and registers of residence, a decision on holding local elections in all 
municipalities in a single day as well as a code of ethics for election campaigns. Furthermore, 
the Committee was tasked with analysing the implementation of and proposing possible 
amendments to the Law on identity cards and the Law on Montenegrin citizenship, as well as 
proposing measures to strengthen the professionalism and transparency of the work of the 
State Election Commission (SEC) and the Anti-Corruption Agency (ACA). No progress was 
achieved on any of these issues. Furthermore, no comprehensive audit to enhance public trust 
in the voter’s registry, for example through conducting field tests, has been conducted. 
Previous allegations of double-registered voters in one or more countries of the region need 


===== PAGE 12 =====
 
11 
 
to be thoroughly investigated by the competent authorities. 
Following the dismissal of the SEC President in June 2021, the new President was elected 
only on 8 December 2021, after local elections were held in Cetinje, Mojkovac and Petnjica. 
Therefore, the SEC could not convene sessions to organize elections in prisons and to 
accredit election observers, consequently the elections took place without accredited 
observers. The SEC started working on election reform areas that are in its sole competence, 
such as analysing and revising its by-laws, training in local polling stations and increasing 
transparency of SEC sessions and decisions. In March 2022, the SEC adopted revised by-
laws to ensure easier access to polling stations and a better voting experience for persons with 
disabilities. In June, the SEC further revised several by-laws in line with OSCE/ODIHR 
recommendations. In July, the SEC adopted voter complaints forms fulfilling an 
OSCE/ODIHR recommendation. The SEC signed a Memorandum of Cooperation with a 
NGO to strengthen the transparency of its work. 
After the local election in Petnjica, four complaints were submitted to the local Municipal 
Election Commission. The MEC and the SEC as second instance rejected all four complaints 
as unfounded. The applicants lodged an appeal against one of the SEC's decisions, which the 
Constitutional Court confirmed. Consequently, the elections in one polling station were 
repeated. On 28 March 2022, local elections took place in Berane and Ulcinj. After the MEC 
of Ulcinj accepted a complaint, elections were repeated in one polling station. 
There are no new developments in the political and judicial follow-up of the alleged misuse 
of public funds for party political purposes in 2012 on the “audio recordings affair”. Political 
and judicial follow-up to the alleged electoral fraud case the ‘envelope affair’ is still ongoing. 
In September 2021, after two appeals submitted by the Special State Prosecutor’s Office, the 
High Court in Podgorica confirmed an indictment against a former high Democratic Party of 
Socialists (DPS) official for money laundering. 
Parliament 
Deep polarisations and mistrust between and within political coalitions has marked the period 
during which two fractious governments have been in power. The work of the Parliament has 
been marked by boycotts of the ruling majority and of the opposition, changes of 
governments and by the change of two consecutive Speakers in the process. The legislation-
making process was significantly affected. The Parliament should demonstrate in practise its 
commitment to Montenegro’s EU reform agenda and work on overcoming deep polarisation. 
There was no effective political dialogue and constructive engagement by political parties 
with a view to enhancing parliamentary accountability and government oversight. 
Government and Parliament cooperation should be further regulated to enhance Parliament’s 
participation in and oversight of the accession process. Relations between Parliament and 
Executive need to be regulated by an Act of Parliament, as the current Rules of Procedure 
were not enacted in the form of a law.  
The Parliament continued to strengthen its transparency, by establishing several citizen-
oriented services. The capacity of Parliament to integrate and oversight gender equality issues 
needs to be enhanced.  
For the first part of the reporting period, tensions within the majority supporting the 
government led most MPs to boycott the plenary sessions during October and November 
2021, with the exception of a few extraordinary sessions. This contributed to effectively 
suspending the decision-making processes in the Parliament. It was only at the end of 
December 2021 that the Parliament convened the ordinary autumn session. 


===== PAGE 13 =====
 
12 
 
In January 2022, the long-lasting divergences within the parliamentary majority led to a vote 
of no-confidence in the Government and its downfall. The Speaker of the Parliament was also 
dismissed. The Parliament convened for its first regular session of the year only on 28 April. 
With the vote of 45 MPs, the Parliament elected a new government led by Mr Abazović and a 
new Parliament Speaker. Following the signature of a Fundamental Agreement with the 
Serbian Orthodox Church (SOC) on 3 August, the government was opposed by part of its 
own majority and lost a no-confidence motion on 19 August. As a result, the Montenegrin 
Government is currently exercising its functions in a caretaker mandate, as was also the case 
between January and April 2022. On 30 September the Parliament decided to not debate the 
shortening of its mandate, as had been proposed by the President following the missing of the 
deadline to nominate a new PM designate.  
As regards the Parliament’s legislative role, the occasional boycott of certain parliamentary 
groups weakened the quality of the debates. Bills were often discussed in the absence of basic 
financial assessments and without an adequate opinion of the government. The Parliament's 
capacity to scrutinise draft legislation for compliance with the EU acquis remains limited. 
During the December 2021 session, the Parliament elected a Vice-President of the Parliament 
from among MPs of minority parties and appointed the President of the State Election 
Commission and the Deputy Protector of Human Rights and Freedoms. At the same sitting, 
the Parliament elected five lay members of the Prosecutorial Council. The Parliament also 
adopted important laws and decisions, including the 2022 Budget Law, together with eight 
accompanying laws proposed by the government as part of the “Europe Now” programme.  
Efforts were undertaken to improve parliamentary oversight, but effective control remains 
at an early stage. The Rules of Procedure stipulate that the Prime Minister's Hour takes place 
once a month, and eight such sittings were held during the reporting period. The Parliament 
does not have the capacity to hold ministers accountable for non–attendance or lack of 
answers. On three occasions, the previous Prime Minister did not accept interpellations 
adopted by the Parliament against the former ministers.   
Despite procedural and institutional improvements, quantitative analysis on the work of the 
Parliament and its working bodies in the reporting period does not show significant progress 
on oversight, partly due to occasional boycott and the consequent impossibility for the 
committees to work in full capacity. Some committee chairs, however, use oversight 
proactively. The Committee on political system, judiciary and administration was the most 
active, whereas the Committee on Anti-Corruption least active. 
The Parliament continued to improve the level of transparency and communication with the 
public. The most visible form of parliamentary transparency is the possibility to follow 
proceedings through the media and on the Internet, by live broadcasting sessions of the 
Parliament and its working bodies or on request through the Parliamentary Channel. An 
important innovation is the establishment of the E-petition project, where citizens can contact 
the Parliament to initiate legislation. The project aims at fully digitalising the entire 
legislative process. However, the project has not been promoted enough and many citizens 
are not aware of its existence. 
No reports on violations of the Code of Ethics have been submitted to the Committee on 
Human Rights and Freedoms in the reporting period. The Parliament received 348 citizens' 
petitions, 22 were related to the E-petition legislative initiative.  
The professional and expert capacity of the Parliament’s administrative staff continued being 
strengthened. In the reporting period, on the proposal of the Administrative Board, the 
Parliament passed the decision to allow initiating criminal proceedings against one opposition 


===== PAGE 14 =====
 
13 
 
Member of the Parliament of Montenegro, at the request of the Special State Prosecutor's 
Office, due to alleged abuse of his official position. The Special State Prosecution Office also 
requested waiving the immunity of five more MPs, without getting approval.  
Politics continue to be male-dominated and it is noticeable that verbal abuse against women 
in political life is growing, especially in the public sphere and particularly towards the 
younger politicians. Systemic shortcomings remain, and patriarchal attitudes and insufficient 
party interest are still obstacles to a more active involvement of women in politics. The cross-
party Women’s Club in the Parliament continued its active role and initiated discussions on 
improving the legal framework on gender related issues through amendments to the Criminal 
Code. The Committee for Gender Equality improved its oversight function, by organising a 
number of consultative control hearings. MPs and parliamentary staff increased their capacity 
in gender-responsive budgeting and gender assessments in drafting and adopting legislation 
and policies. 
Shortcomings in the legal framework regulating political parties and their funding persist. 
The results produced by the Anti-corruption Agency’s and the State Audit Institution’s work 
on the monitoring of political parties’ financing are very limited. More efforts are needed to 
strengthen the control mechanisms and political parties should follow-up on their 
recommendations in a more effective and transparent manner.  
Inappropriate speech still dominates some debates, with MPs using terms that in the context 
of deepened political, social and ethnic divisions do not contribute to much-needed 
reconciliation and improved inter-party dialogue. 
Governance 
The reporting period was marked by turmoil within the ruling majorities, which brought 
about a blockage of several reform processes and government activities, and had an impact 
on the effective institutional functioning of the country. A Minister of Justice was dismissed 
in June 2021 and until April 2022 no replacement was appointed. From beginning of 
February until 28 April 2022, the government exercised its duties as a caretaker, a number of 
senior appointments were made at the end of the mandate. The current government has been 
fully on duty for less than four months, and is currently continuing in a caretaker capacity. 
Montenegro continued to implement its national programme for EU accession. In November 
2021, the government adopted the “Information on the need to form working groups for the 
programming of the EU Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance for the period 2021-2027 
(IPA III)” and “Information on progress in the process of negotiations on a cluster approach”. 
On 28 April 2022 the Ministry of European Affairs, under the responsibility of a Deputy 
Prime Minister, leading the negotiation process with the EU, was established. In August 
2022, the government adopted decisions on a new EU negotiation structure and amended the 
decisions on working groups for negotiation Chapters 23 and 24. The new structure consists 
of the Negotiation Collegium, Council for Rule of Law, Negotiation Team, negotiation 
working groups, and the Ministry of European Affairs. The negotiating structure has been 
slimmed down considerably. 
Overall, transparency of governance remained an issue. However, some positive steps were 
made, including a regular, proactive publication of information on all expenditures from the 
central budget.  
Until April 2022, the government frequently resorted to the procedural option of adopting 
decisions without formally convening a government session and at the end of December 
2021, extended the level of "confidential" for another five years for audio recordings from the 
sessions. Government sessions are now online broadcasted.  


===== PAGE 15 =====
 
14 
 
As for local governance, there has been some progress reflected in more efficient and better-
quality strategic planning processes at local level. Twenty-three municipalities developed 
their Strategic Development Plans. All municipalities in Montenegro established local 
employment partnerships. 
The “Europe Now” programme affected revenues of municipalities, decreasing revenues in 
some local governments even up to 75%, as compared to February 2021. At the same time, 
municipalities received lower contributions from the Equalization Fund, which hampers 
sustainable budgeting, especially for the poorest municipalities. 
New local government governments were established in Cetinje, Mojkovac and Petnjica, 
following the December 2021 local elections, and in Ulcinj and Berane following elections in 
March 2022.On 31 March 2022, the government dissolved the Municipal Assembly of 
Budva, on the grounds of not performing its competencies for more than six months and 
appointed a Board of Trustees, which elected in August 2022 a new mayor of Budva who 
will exercise its functions until the new local elections take place.  
Women’s political participation remains low at the local level. For the most recent local 
elections in Berane, two electoral lists were submitted and confirmed, even though they failed 
to ensure the legally binding quota of 30% of women candidates. There is a need to introduce 
mandatory gender budgeting and assign more funds to women’s entrepreneurship at local 
level and to ensure gender mainstreaming at all levels of decision making, policy planning 
and implementation. 
Civil society 
The role of civil society is recognised and promoted, although the current legal and 
institutional framework needs to be further improved to strengthen the consultation and 
cooperation mechanisms between state institutions and civil society in the context of the EU 
accession process. Amendments to the Law on free access to information and the law on 
volunteering are yet to be adopted. New members of the Council for Cooperation of State 
Bodies and Non-Governmental Organisations need to be appointed, so that it can resume its 
work. Although funding rules to civil society organisations (CSOs) are in place, only a few 
ministries launched calls to award grants to such organisations. The quality of cooperation 
between state bodies and civil society would be enhanced if ministries had greater capacity to 
carry out strategic planning, monitoring and evaluation of the support they provide to CSOs. 
An empowered civil society is a crucial component of any democratic system and should be 
recognised and treated as such by state institutions. 
The overall legal and institutional framework on freedom of expression, of association and 
assembly is in place. Draft amendments to the Law on access to information, drafted in 
consultation with civil society organisations are pending adoption. Information classified by 
public institutions and withheld from the public remains an issue, as in practice this restricts 
the access of CSOs and the public to key policy decisions. This concern needs to be 
addressed as a matter of priority. Montenegro does not have a law on volunteering, which 
would be needed to promote and regulate volunteer work in CSOs and hence increase their 
human resources. After the 2018-2020 strategy for cooperation with NGOs expired, a new 
(2022-2026) strategy was adopted in July 2022.   
The role of civil society in the accession process is recognised and promoted at political level 
and CSOs are represented in working groups devoted to the chapters of the EU accession 
negotiations. In 2021, most ministries appointed representatives of CSOs to working groups 
in charge of drafting laws and national strategies in their respective areas; this is an obligation 


===== PAGE 16 =====
 
15 
 
under the Law on public administration. However, not all ministries conducted public 
consultations when draft laws and strategies were prepared. A significant number of laws 
were adopted without prior consultation of civil society. The consultation mechanisms with 
civil society need to be further improved, in order for it to become useful and effective. 
The Council for Cooperation of State Administration Bodies and Non-Governmental 
Organisations, a body consisting of an equal number of state officials and CSO 
representatives, held only one meeting in 2021. The Council rules were amended in July 
2021, to make its work more transparent, in compliance with the new Decree on the 
organisation and operation of state administration. Under these amendments, documents 
discussed by the Council and minutes of its meetings are published. External participants and 
representatives of vulnerable groups can be invited to its meetings when relevant. However, 
no new Council members have been appointed so far following the expiry of the Council’s 
term of office in September 2021. If the Council is to fulfil its function effectively, it will 
need to improve its visibility and its outreach to CSOs and make sure that its rules function. 
The rules for public funding of CSOs require all ministries to conduct consultations with 
CSOs on their annual funding priorities, to publish open calls and to award grants through a 
selection process involving external evaluators. Some EUR 3.7 million from the state budget 
were allocated to CSO projects in 2021, including EUR 928 302 to co-finance 25 CSO 
projects supported by the EU. However, not all ministries have launched calls to award grants 
to CSOs, despite the obligation to do so, laid down in the Law on NGOs. In some cases, 
contracts with CSOs were signed but funds were not disbursed. New external evaluators were 
selected to improve the quality of the evaluation. However, 90 % of the newly selected 
evaluators were the same as in the previous year. The capacity of ministries to monitor and 
evaluate projects implemented by CSOs is still to be strengthened. Some EUR 4 million were 
allocated for funding or co-funding CSO projects in 2022.  
CSOs can also access funds at local level, according to the Law on local self-government. 
However, most of the local authorities do not launch calls, or, when they do so, the 
transparency of the process needs to be improved. 
2.1.2. Public administration reform 
Montenegro is moderately prepared on the reform of its public administration. Overall, limited 
progress was made, including the adoption of the new 2022-2026 strategy for public administration 
reform. Conversely, the effects of the reorganisation of the public administration and the 
amendments to the Law on civil servants and state employees adopted in 2021 continued to be felt, 
with staff changes, a loss of know-how on EU accession process-related matters and an overall 
slowing of the pace of reforms. The lowered requirements introduced by these amendments are a 
source of continuing concern with regard to the merit-based recruitment, competence and 
independence of civil servants. Furthermore, draft amendments of the Law on local self-government 
would similarly lower such requirements at the local level. Amendments to the Law on access to 
information remain to be adopted by Parliament. Effective lines of accountability within the 
administration are still to be established.  
Strong political will is needed to effectively address issues related to merit-based recruitments, 
optimisation of the state administration and implementation of managerial accountability. Most of 
the recommendations from 2021 remain valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular:  
→ implement the new public administration reform strategy, in line with the relevant action plans 
and mid-term budgetary framework; adopt the new public financial management reform 
programme and start its implementation;  
→ improve Montenegrin citizens’ access to public information by finalising, adopting and 


===== PAGE 17 =====
 
16 
 
implementing amendments to the Law on access to information in line with the principles of 
good public administration;  
→ ensure effective lines of accountability between and within the institutions; amend the Law on 
civil servants and state employees and the Law on local self-government in order to ensure 
recruitments according to the principles of merit, competence and transparency. 
Strategic framework for public administration reform  
Given that the previous 2016-2020 public administration reform (PAR) strategy had 
expired in 2020, the year 2021 was without a strategic framework until the year’s end. The 
government adopted a dynamic action plan for October-December 2021 covering issues not 
completed under the previous strategy, but results remained limited given the main focus on 
developing the new strategy.   
In December 2021, the government adopted a new PAR strategy for 2022-2026 and an 
action plan for 2022-2024. Civil society organisations were actively involved in the 
preparation of the new strategy. Political support for public administration reform continued 
to be ensured through the PAR Council, chaired by the Prime Minister, with three sessions in 
2021. The PAR strategy is linked to annual budgeting and the mid-term budgetary 
framework. However, reliance on donor funding continues to be substantial.  
The overall quality of strategic documents produced over the reporting period improved, 
and the documents are largely aligned with the standards set out in the decree for strategic 
planning and related methodology. Proper costing of strategic documents and their linkages 
to the budgetary process require particular attention.   
Policy development and coordination 
In Montenegro, the legal framework for policy development is in place. In January 2022, the 
government adopted its medium-term work programme covering 2022-2024, with a detailed 
work plan for 2022. However, the priority pillars and objectives from the work programme 
are still neither interlinked nor aligned with the programme structure of the budget. 
Institutional structures for a coherent policy-making system and coordination are in place. 
However, the central coordination and quality control role of the General Secretariat of the 
Government needs to be strengthened.  
Evidence-based policy-making continues to be only partially ensured. While administrative 
data collection has improved, the quality of data has yet to be enhanced. Regulatory impact 
assessments are systematically produced, but their quality needs to be further improved. The 
legal requirements for inter-ministerial and public consultations are in place. However, the 
quality of the public consultation process in terms of both set-up and follow up has yet to be 
improved. Public scrutiny of the government’s work should also be further strengthened. 
Most government policy reports are activity- rather than results-based, making it more 
difficult to measure achievements. Communication with the public on ongoing reforms needs 
to be improved. 
Public financial management (PFM) 
The implementation of the action plan for the 2016-2020 PFM reform programme was 
extended to 2021, allowing for the consolidation of previous results in programme-based and 
gender-sensitive budgeting, performance budgeting and the gradual implementation of a mid-
term budgetary framework. However, the action plan was not extended to cover 2022. The 
adoption of amendments to the Law on budget and fiscal responsibility to consolidate these 
reforms, including the establishment of a fiscal council, is still pending. The state budget 


===== PAGE 18 =====
 
17 
 
electronic system was considerably improved but challenges remain over the inclusion of all 
public institutions in the centralised salary system and with regard to interoperability of the 
different IT systems in place.  
A new 2022-2026 PFM reform programme and action plan for 2022-2024 are yet to be 
adopted. Activities are expected to focus on management of public investments, debt and 
fiscal risks, notably on reform of state-owned enterprises, and on commitment and assets 
management and accrual accounting. Reforms in these areas will also contribute to 
implementation of several national development strategies and the economic reform 
programme. Further fine-tuning of programme-based budgeting, performance budgeting and 
internal control systems, as well as increased alignment between strategic planning and mid-
term budgetary framework, have the potential to bring about deep modernisation of the public 
finance management system in the next few years. Public finance management at local level 
should be included in the new PFM reform programme. 
As concerns digitalisation in the PFM area, the interoperability of various IT systems 
remains an issue. Some efforts took place to improve budget planning and the central 
calculation of salaries but the interlinkage of other systems, especially the treasury system, 
still needs to be completed or established. This is delaying significant progress on PFM, on 
issues such as the introduction of accrual accounting, and the full development of 
performance budgeting.   
On budget transparency, continuous improvements to programme-based budget 
classification, with programme goals and performance indicators, have contributed to better 
clarifying the link between high-level strategic and policy objectives and annual and multi-
annual budgets. However, weaknesses in monitoring and reporting still limit the analysis on 
effectiveness of spending and efficient service delivery. A citizens’ budget and new templates 
for in-year and annual budget execution reports, including non-financial and performance 
information, are yet to be adopted and implemented. 
Public service and human resources management 
The Human Resource Management Authority continues to proactively manage civil service 
training in horizontal areas, but a training needs analysis is yet to be carried out. On human 
resource management, improvements were made to registers on the number of employees at 
the central level. 
Amendments to the Law on civil servants and state employees adopted in 2021 lowered 
qualification requirements for the recruitment of civil servants, affecting merit-based 
recruitments, and the competence and independence of the public service. The criteria for 
dismissals were not transparently applied. This continued to affect the pace of public 
administration reform during the reporting period.   
Accountability of administration 
Amendments to the Law on access to information are still to be adopted by Parliament, the 
aim being to increase transparency in the work of public bodies and to grant Montenegrin 
citizens easier access to information. Implementing legislation on the reimbursement of costs 
in the access to information process was adopted in October 2021. In December 2021, 
Parliament dismissed two members of the Council of the Agency for Personal Data 
Protection and Free Access to Information, acting as an executive board of the agency. This 
has effectively incapacitated the decision-making of the agency, including the review of 
appeals against decisions of first-instance authorities on requests for public information. 


===== PAGE 19 =====
 
18 
 
As concerns lines of accountability, the legislative framework for the supervision of the 
work of state administration bodies is in place, with the lines of responsibility of the 
ministries as well as their respective bodies defined. However, the functioning of this 
framework is yet to be improved, ensuring that the reports and annual plans of the 
subordinate authorities submitted for formal approval to the relevant ministry are result-
oriented, with objectives, targets and measurable indicators.   
The organisational set-up of the state administration has not been fully aligned with the 
Law on state administration. Reorganisations of the state administration conducted during the 
reporting period were made without sufficient ex-ante analysis or strategic approach. 
However, in May 2022, Parliament adopted amendments to the Law on state administration, 
limiting the number of state secretary posts in the public administration. This has resulted in 
fewer political appointments in the public administration.  
Service delivery to citizens and businesses 
Overall, while Montenegro has made some improvements in the area of digitalising services, 
the progress in public service delivery remained slow. There was a lack of clear ownership 
and leadership for the development of public services in general. Administrative procedures 
remained bureaucratic and complicated, and there was no evidence of work on harmonising 
implementing legislation with the Law on administrative procedures during the reporting 
period.  
In December 2021, the government adopted the 2022-2026 strategy for the digital 
transformation, with two main objectives: improving capacity for digital transformation, 
and strengthening digital awareness of Montenegrin society and digital competitiveness of 
the information and communication technology sector. December 2021 also saw the adoption 
of Montenegro’s 2022-2026 cyber security strategy. The strategy envisages activities to 
improve cyber-security in the country and establish a centre for cyber security. 
The programme for attracting ‘digital nomads’, adopted by the government in December 
2021, aims to make Montenegro a globally attractive destination for digital experts. The Law 
on electronic documents is yet to be adopted. The purpose of this law is to contribute to 
accelerating digital transformation and to encourage the use of electronic documents, digital 
signatures and electronic seals in public administration and economy. The law is also 
expected to bring savings on administration and more streamlined procedures. 
To achieve efficiency in work, reduce the use of paper in public administration and reduce 
the costs, the ’paperless administration’ project was piloted in the Ministry of Public 
Administration, the Human Resources Management Authority and the Ministry of Justice and 
Human and Minority Rights. All document exchanges between these institutions are now 
done electronically. 
During the reporting period, the Code for Montenegro was drawn up as a platform 
volunteering to solve citizens’ problems and challenges. The idea of the platform is to 
transfer good practices in the area of digital transformation from private industry, civil 
society and academia to public administration.  
2.2. RULE OF LAW AND FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS 
2.2.1 Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights 
The EU’s founding values include the rule of law and respect for human rights. An effective 
(independent, high quality and efficient) judicial system and effective fight against corruption 
are of paramount importance, as is respect for fundamental rights in law and in practice. 


===== PAGE 20 =====
 
19 
 
Montenegro remains moderately prepared to apply the EU acquis and the European standards 
in this area and has made limited progress overall. Limited progress was made in the area of the 
judiciary, with no progress on the implementation of key judicial reforms and a limited track 
record on judicial accountability.  
Corruption and high-level corruption remain issues of concern and are prevalent in many areas. 
Some progress has been made in the prevention of corruption, but progress was limited in the 
repression of corruption. Further efforts are needed to establish a credible and effective criminal 
justice response. A new strategic framework is needed, which should foster an integrated 
approach, focusing on the prevention and repression of corruption.  
On fundamental rights, Montenegro continued meeting obligations from international human 
rights instruments and legislation; however, challenges remain in ensuring the effective 
implementation of national legislation, in particular for the most vulnerable groups. While 
Montenegro benefits from a pluralistic media environment, progress was limited on freedom 
of expression and media freedom. Full and effective protection of journalists and other media 
workers and further alignment of the media policy and legal framework with the EU acquis 
remain to be ensured.  
Functioning of the judiciary 
Montenegro’s judicial system is moderately prepared, with limited progress overall. The 
implementation of key judicial reforms remains stalled. Certain long-pending high-level judicial 
appointments took place, bringing more stability to the justice system, but several others are still 
pending, including at the Constitutional Court, which require a qualified majority in Parliament; 
this process must ensure the merit-based appointment of individuals able to act independently, 
impartially and with integrity. Concerns remain over the institutional performance and 
consolidation of independent Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils. The track record on judicial 
accountability remains limited. Effective independence, integrity, accountability and 
professionalism of the judiciary need to be further strengthened, including by implementing the 
relevant constitutional and legal framework and by adopting legislative changes in line with 
European standards. The efficiency of the judiciary also needs to be strengthened. The human, 
financial, ICT and infrastructure management systems must be substantially improved. The 
adoption of a new strategy for the rationalisation of the judicial network is still pending, as is the 
implementation of the ICT strategy for the judiciary. Montenegro continues to make progress on 
the domestic handling of war crimes, with good judicial cooperation with neighbouring countries 
and with the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT).  
Last year’s recommendations have not been met and remain largely valid. Therefore, in the 
coming year, Montenegro should in particular:  
→ ensure the consolidation of merit-based key judicial appointments of individuals able to act 
independently, impartially and with integrity. This includes the members of the Judicial 
Council, the Supreme State Prosecutor, and judges at the Constitutional Court;  
→ avoid reversing earlier achievements, ensure the effective independence and professionalism 
of the judiciary by addressing in substance all the outstanding recommendations of the 
Venice Commission and the Council of Europe Group of States against Corruption 
(GRECO), and by fully and unambiguously implementing the relevant constitutional and 
legal framework;  
→ ensure the independence, accountability, integrity and impartiality of the justice system by 
improving the institutional performance and operational capacity of the Judicial and 
Prosecutorial Councils and by reviewing and effectively implementing the disciplinary and 
ethical framework for judges and prosecutors to strengthen its objectivity, proportionality and 
effectiveness;  


===== PAGE 21 =====
 
20 
 
→ improve the efficiency of the judiciary by adopting and implementing a new strategy for the 
rationalisation of the judicial network, and by starting to implement the ICT strategy for the 
judiciary. 
Strategic documents 
The implementation of the 2019-2022 strategy for the reform of the judiciary is ongoing and 
a Council was set up to monitor this in November 2021. The 2021-2022 action plan for the 
implementation of the strategy was adopted in December 2021 and a mechanism for 
monitoring its implementation is in place. The Ministry of Justice is yet to demonstrate 
unreserved commitment to full and timely implementation of all segments in the judicial 
reforms.  
Management bodies 
The Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils are the principal bodies managing the judicial system 
and the careers of judges and prosecutors. Their composition and appointment procedures are 
broadly in line with European standards. However, outstanding issues with regard to the 
functioning of both councils remain an issue of concern, namely due to their incomplete 
composition. The Judicial Council’s independence from undue political influence, for 
instance due to the ex officio participation of the Minister of Justice, as identified by the 
GRECO, is yet to be strengthened.  
Moreover, the Venice Commission’s recommendations in its 2021 Opinion on the revised 
amendments to the Law on the State Prosecution Service concerning risks of politicisation of 
the Prosecutorial Council have not been addressed in full. since they entered into force in 
June 2021. New lay members continue to be voted in by simple majority in Parliament, an 
issue on which the Venice Commission already provided recommendations in 2014 and 
2015, and which remains to be addressed in order to mitigate the risks of undue political 
influence over the Council.  
It is essential that Montenegro address these issues in order to avoid reversing its earlier 
achievements on justice reform. Additional guarantees need to be put in place to mitigate the 
risks and perception of undue political influence over the Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils. 
In June 2022, the General Conference of Judges elected four judges as new members of the 
Judicial Council. These took office in August after the term of office of the Council’s 
previous judicial members expired. However, the Judicial Council’s long-lasting functioning 
in an incomplete composition has been undermining its ability to take decisions that require a 
two thirds majority, such as the appointment of the Supreme Court President, and causes 
frequent delays in the exercise of some important powers, with a negative impact on the 
overall functioning of the justice system. This means that instead of 10 members, the Council 
currently has three lay members, four judges and the acting President of the Supreme Court. 
Due to the inability to secure a qualified majority in Parliament for the election of the 
Council’s lay members, a temporary anti-deadlock mechanism introduced in 2018 continues 
to be applied and the term of office of three lay members has been extended several times and 
are currently in their ninth year in office, while the Constitution limits the term of office to 
four. In August 2022, the Parliament failed to replace the lay members in the first round of 
voting following a selection procedure that started in May 2022 even though up to 35 eligible 
candidates applied. In September the Parliament appointed one of the required lay members. 
In January 2022, the Prime Minister took on the role of acting Minister of Justice, Human and 
Minority Rights, but did not participate in the work of the Judicial Council as an ex officio 
member in this capacity. 


===== PAGE 22 =====
 
21 
 
Following the proclamation of the new Prosecutorial Council in August 2021, the Council did 
not hold any session until early 2022 due to its incomplete composition. In December 2021, 
Parliament appointed five members from the ranks of eminent lawyers, including one 
representative of non-governmental organisations (NGOs). This allowed the Council to 
restart its functioning. In February 2022, it unanimously appointed a new acting Supreme 
State Prosecutor from the ranks of prosecutors, as recommended by the Venice Commission 
in its 2021 opinion. However, the appointment of a permanent Supreme State Prosecutor, 
requiring a qualified majority in Parliament, is pending since October 2019.  
In February 2022, the Prosecutorial Council terminated the mandate of the former Chief 
Special Prosecutor and nine other prosecutors due to their meeting the conditions for 
retirement. In March 2022, the Council appointed a new Chief Special Prosecutor with a 
large majority (10 votes in favour and 1 against). At the request of the new Chief Special 
Prosecutor, in June 2022 the Prosecutorial Council reassigned three additional state 
prosecutors to the Special State Prosecutor’s Office.  
Following organisational changes, the Prosecutorial Council has yet to consolidate its regular 
work and practice.  
The operational capacity of both councils’ secretariats continues to improve but needs to be 
strengthened further. The 2022 budget of the Judicial Council was increased by 51.6% 
compared to the previous year, mainly due to the planned procurement of software. The lack 
of adequate spatial/working conditions for the Judicial Council and its Secretariat remains a 
long-term concern. The 2022 budget of the Prosecutorial Council was reduced by 15% 
compared to the previous year. The administrative capacities of both the Judicial and the 
Prosecutorial Councils have still to be improved. These include strategic, budget and human 
resources planning and management, and public communication. The 2022 Law on the 
budget established for the first time a system of distribution of financial resources by courts 
and prosecution offices individually. Results-based financial management in the judiciary is 
being gradually introduced across the board, with initial steps undertaken in 2020 and a 
number of internal financial procedures/regulations revised and codified in 2021. However, 
although key performance indicators in courts and prosecution offices, and methodology for 
performance-based financial management, are being piloted at basic court level, the 
methodology and tools for performance-based financial management and control are yet to be 
established. Overall, resource levels do not match judicial performance targets.  
The transparency of both councils continues to improve. The sessions of both councils are 
open to the interested public (media, NGOs). The transparency of the councils’ work needs to 
be further enhanced by publishing fully reasoned decisions on promotions, appointments and 
disciplinary cases.  Members of both councils should devote more time and show full 
commitment to performing their functions. The Prosecutorial Council needs to demonstrate a 
more proactive approach to addressing issues within the public prosecution service, including 
with respect to the professional performance of the heads of state prosecution offices and of 
state prosecutors themselves, including their accountability and professionalism.  
Further efforts are needed to effectively consolidate strong and independent Judicial and 
Prosecutorial Councils, to substantially improve the functioning of the entire judicial system 
and restore trust in it. 
Independence and impartiality 
Following the 2013 amendments to Montenegro’s Constitution, judicial independence was 
strengthened by increasing the safeguards against the risks of undue political influence over 
appointments. Overall, the legal framework guaranteeing judicial independence is in place, 


===== PAGE 23 =====
 
22 
 
but the judiciary and the prosecution service continue to be perceived as vulnerable to 
political interference, including due to some deficiencies that still need to be addressed in the 
relevant legislation. In this regard, a firmer commitment is needed to ensure the full and 
effective independence, integrity, and impartiality of Montenegro’s justice system. This 
includes fully and unambiguously implementing the relevant constitutional and legal 
framework and amending it as relevant in line with European standards. Political leaders 
should refrain from statements that undermine the independence of the judiciary and the 
autonomy of the state prosecution service.  
The underlying constitutional and legal framework limits the appointments of court 
presidents to maximum two terms in order to prevent over-concentration of power. However, 
three basic court presidents re-appointed for at least a third term of office between 2019 and 
2020 are still in office. Four public calls for the election of a new President of the Supreme 
Court were unsuccessful. Following the retirement of the Deputy President of the Supreme 
Court in August 2021, the Council appointed the acting President of the Supreme Court to the 
position of member of the Judicial Council in September 2021. In March 2022, the Judicial 
Council elected 11 judges to the Supreme Court. With these appointments, the quorum for 
holding the Supreme Court’s General Assembly was met, so the Court can now propose a 
candidate for President of the Supreme Court. The Judicial Council has yet to appoint the 
new President of the Administrative Court; the position has been vacant for more than twelve 
months.  
The head of the basic state prosecution office in Podgorica was appointed in May 2022.  
The random allocation of cases is provided for by the Law on courts and implemented 
automatically through the judicial information system (JIS). However, limitations remain in 
very small courts, and the system has not been introduced in the misdemeanour courts. In 
2021, a significantly smaller number of cases (114) was delegated among the courts, 
including 86 cases delegated at the level of basic courts and 28 cases delegated between the 
two high courts. Although establishing clear criteria for reallocation of cases is still needed, 
this reduction is an improvement in the practice of reallocation of cases between courts, and 
one which ensures the right to a lawful judge.  
The Constitutional Court continues to operate in an incomplete composition. Following the 
resignation of one of its members in January 2022, the Court operated with four instead of 
seven judges, which in practice meant that unanimity was required for the Court to take 
decisions, undermining its ability to function, its performance and efficiency. In July 2022, 
the procedure for appointing new judges failed in Parliament, due to a lack of political 
agreement on the seventeen candidates. The Parliament then published a new call to fill the 
four positions and the procedure is ongoing. Furthermore, one judge retired in September 
2022, so the Court currently counts with only three members. Therefore, the Constitutional 
Court lacks the required quorum to take decisions and is unable to operate.  
Accountability 
The revision of the Law on the Judicial Council and judges is ongoing. The revision will 
address notably the disciplinary and ethical liability of judges and the criteria for the 
appointment, promotion and professional evaluation of judges. 
In April 2022, one basic prosecutor was arrested and detained on suspicion of abuse of 
official position. In May 2022, the President of the Commercial Court of Montenegro was 
arrested and detained on suspicion of organising a criminal group, corruption and 
embezzlement. Following the arrest, the President was temporarily removed from office, 


===== PAGE 24 =====
 
23 
 
pending completion of the investigation and the decision on prosecution. The Judicial 
Council then appointed an acting President.  
The promotion and enforcement of codes of ethics and disciplinary accountability standards 
and procedures for judges and prosecutors remain limited. There is a limited track record and 
a lack of commitment from both the Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils to ensuring 
accountability. The legal framework for disciplinary issues and ethics for judges is being 
reviewed. Further improvements and effective enforcement of the judicial inspection system 
are needed, including more thorough and unannounced inspections.  
The system for detecting breaches of integrity rules needs to be made more effective, 
objective, consistent and credible. There is also a need to ensure the follow-up of all cases 
that give grounds for disciplinary or ethical responsibility. A legal remedy against decisions 
of the ethical commissions of both councils has yet to be introduced by the relevant law. The 
decisions of the Prosecutorial and Judicial Councils remain insufficiently motivated and case-
law is yet to be developed.  
The Ethical Commission of the Judicial Council did not perform its duties for 7 months 
(August 2021 – March 2022) due to its incomplete composition. In March 2022, the General 
session of the Supreme Court appointed one of its members to the Ethical Commission of the 
Judicial Council, creating conditions for the Commission to resume its work. In 2021, four 
disciplinary proceedings were launched before the Judicial Council’s Disciplinary 
Commission, while no violations of the Code of Ethics for judges were found in 2021. 
Overall, in 2021 the Commission issued nine decisions and two opinions. During the first half 
of 2022, 26 disciplinary proceedings were initiated against judges due to failure to submit 
their declarations of assets and income to Agency for the Prevention of Corruption. So far, 
five have been rejected as unfounded. In 2022, one violation of the Code of Ethics for Judges 
was found by the Ethical Commission of the Judicial Council. The Law does not provide for 
any legal remedy against the Commission’s decisions. In June 2022, the Ethical Commission 
adopted the guidelines on the freedom of expression of judges. 
The Ethical Commission of the Prosecutorial Council has not performed its duties since the 
appointment of the new composition of the Prosecutorial Council in August 2021. In 2022, 6 
initiatives were pending before the Ethical Commission of the Prosecutorial Council. In two 
cases, the Commission found violations of the Code of Ethics for state prosecutors, while 
three initiatives were considered unfounded. Furthermore, in 2021 two disciplinary 
proceedings were brought before the Prosecutorial Council’s Disciplinary Commission, while 
in 2022, disciplinary proceedings were initiated against one state prosecutor. In one case, the 
Commission found a violation of disciplinary rules and imposed a sanction consisting in a 
20% salary decrease for 3 months.  
The approach of the Ethical Commissions of the Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils to 
handling cases is still not sufficiently effective and consistent.  
In 2021 and 2022, judicial inspectors from the Ministry of Justice, Human and Minority 
Rights performed supervision of the work in 21 courts, nine state prosecution offices, 53 
notaries and 28 public bailiffs. No irregularities were found during the supervision of the 
courts in 2021. In 2022, irregularities were observed in two basic courts. No irregularities 
were found during the supervision of the prosecutor’s offices. Judicial inspectors conducted 
43 inspections of the work of public notaries and found three irregularities during the 
supervision. Two new inspectors were hired in January 2022; however, the Ministry’s 
capacity in this area still requires significant strengthening. The law on systematisation of the 
Ministry plans to increase the number of judicial inspectors to five. 


===== PAGE 25 =====
 
24 
 
There were no significant results on the accountability of independent legal professions. The 
new Code of Ethics for Lawyers has not yet been adopted. In August 2021, the new Code of 
Ethics of the Association of Court Experts was adopted. Implementation of the codes of 
ethics of notaries, bailiffs and court interpreters remained limited and needs to be further 
enhanced. The self-regulatory roles of the chambers and professional associations of legal 
professions must also be enhanced further. 
Professionalism and competence 
Montenegro continues to organise single nationwide competitions for judges and prosecutors. 
The 2020-2022 plan for vacant judicial positions was amended several times during 2021, 
given the large number of resignations and retirements. In the reporting period, the Judicial 
Council elected four court presidents, nine judges of the High Court, eight judges of basic 
courts, seven judges of misdemeanour courts, and 51 candidates for judges, while the 
procedures for appointing several court presidents and more judges are ongoing. In 2021, one 
judge was voluntarily reassigned. The procedure for appointing the Administrative Court 
president has been ongoing for more than 8 months.  
In 2021, the Prosecutorial Council elected two prosecutors to the Supreme State Prosecution 
Office, nine heads of prosecution offices, five prosecutors to High State Prosecution Offices 
and two prosecutors to the Basic State Prosecution Offices. In July 2021, the Prosecutorial 
Council appointed three special prosecutors, while one state prosecutor was voluntarily 
assigned on a permanent basis to the Basic State Prosecutor’s Office in Podgorica.  
Implementation of the system of regular professional evaluation of judges and prosecutors is 
affected by both council’s inactivity. In 2021, no judges and only one state prosecutor were 
evaluated using the regular assessment scheme. During the reporting period, the evaluation of 
101 judges as part of the promotion procedure was completed. In 2021, four prosecutors were 
evaluated under the promotion procedure.  
The interpretation of legal conditions for the retirement of judges and prosecutors is disputed 
after the 2020 Law on pensions insurance lowered the general age requirement for the right to 
a pension for public officials, deviating from provisions in the general body of labour law. In 
August 2021, the Judicial Council declared the termination of the judicial function of 23 
judges, based on their having met the conditions for retirement. Of these 23 judges, 11 
initiated proceedings before the Constitutional and Administrative Courts, challenging the 
decision of the Judicial Council. Proceedings before the Constitutional and Administrative 
courts are ongoing. In February 2022, the Prosecutorial Council declared the termination of 
the prosecutorial function for 10 state prosecutors, based on their having met the conditions 
for retirement.  
Quality of justice 
The budget for the judiciary for 2022 is EUR 37.3 million (2021: EUR 36.5 million) and 
remains above the regional per capita average. Montenegro had 268 full-time judges (43 per 
100,000 inhabitants) and 111 full-time prosecutors (18 per 100,000 inhabitants) in 2021.  
According to the European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ), the European 
averages are 21 judges/12 prosecutors per 100,000 inhabitants. has 50 judges (60% of whom 
are women) and 19 prosecutors (over 62% of whom are women) per 100 000 inhabitants, far 
above the European average of 17 judges and 11 prosecutors. Collection of court fees 
remains much lower compared to the region. 
The allocated budget for the work of the Centre for Training in Judiciary and State 
Prosecution Service for 2022 amounts to EUR 437 754, which is below the legally 
established threshold. While the Centre continued to be financially supported by the EU and 


===== PAGE 26 =====
 
25 
 
other international donors, its autonomous and self-sustainable functioning will need to be 
ensured. There is continued improvement in the overall functioning of the Centre and its 
staffing levels. However, its administrative, managerial, strategic planning, communication 
and financial management capacities are still to be improved. At the beginning of 2021, there 
were 16 employees in the Centre, whereas at the end the reporting period, there were 12 
employees instead of the 19 posts officially allocated to the Centre.  
In 2021, the former judicial training programming was replaced by a comprehensive training 
needs assessment (TNA) conducted by the Judicial Training Centre, following which a 
general annual training programme for 2022 was developed. Efforts are needed to involve 
more judges and prosecutors in the TNA process and further improve training delivery and 
evaluation practices. TNA should take into consideration the multidisciplinary and practical 
nature of judicial training, essentially intended to transmit professional techniques and values 
complementary to legal education. The Centre must develop capacity to conduct assessment 
on training needs in connection with meeting rule of law standards and implementing the EU 
acquis, and to design and implement corresponding training activities. The total budget 
allocated to training initiatives at the training centres and to other initiatives implemented 
directly by courts and prosecution offices in 2021 amounted to EUR 422 455, a 46% decrease 
on the previous year. 
The results of the 2021 Report on European Judicial training showed that in 2020 
Montenegro had the highest percentage of judges participating in continuous training in EU 
law among all candidate countries and potential candidates, at nearly 20%. It is important to 
establish regular cooperation and more frequent communication between the Judicial 
Training Centre and the Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils. The organisation of meetings 
between the representatives of these institutions in December 2021 is a step in the right 
direction.  
The positive trend in alternative dispute resolution (ADR) continued. The implementation 
of the new law, which provides for the compulsory recourse of this mechanism to the types of 
cases that are suitable for ADR, started in August 2020. In 2021, the ADR system continued 
to expand, with 1 315 settlements reached (2020: 1 269). In 2021, there were 6 106 mediation 
proposals preceding judicial litigation (2020: 1 540). However, the judicial system is not yet 
prepared to accommodate the increased use of ADR, since the implementation of the new 
ADR legislation is still not effective or being applied consistently in the competent courts. 
Further reforms should focus on strengthening the Centre’s supervision, enhancing judges’ 
and mediators’ powers, and increasing the scope and quality of ADR services, especially in 
commercial cases. 
Efficiency 
In 2021, 118 568 cases (2020: 139 560) were pending before Montenegrin courts, 84 143 of 
which were new cases (2020: 80 723). Some 80,485 cases were resolved (2020: 83 206), and 
at the end of 2021 there was 37 963 cases pending. The number of cases older than 3 years 
was 3 794 at the end of 2021 (2020: 3 036). The disposition time, i.e. the average time from 
filing to decision, was 158 days in basic court cases (2020: 150), 197 for commercial cases 
(2020: 148) and 538 days before the Administrative Court (2020: 438).  
As regards enforcement, the backlog of pending enforcement cases before the courts 
decreased. Some 760 cases were pending at the end of 2021 (150 000 in 2016). Since the 
introduction of the bailiff system in 2016, enforcement cases before the courts have gradually 
reduced. In 2021, 76 779 cases were filed with bailiffs’ offices (2020: 66 085), with 47 217 
cases pending at the end of the year (2020: 43 569). The centralised case management system 


===== PAGE 27 =====
 
26 
 
for bailiffs continues to be used consistently, guaranteeing data reliability. The enforcement 
of court decisions remains a challenge, due to the lack of effective follow-up by judicial 
authorities.  
In 2021, the Constitutional Court received 1 344 new cases and resolved 1 498 pending cases. 
The current backlog is some 3 212 cases; 2 967 (around 92%) of those are pending 
constitutional complaints on human rights violations. Furthermore, there are 123 laws and 
127 pieces of implementing legislation adopted by Parliament pending constitutional review. 
Concrete steps need to be taken to ensure adequate operational capacity necessary for the 
efficient functioning of the Court and to reduce the backlog of cases. Currently, 4 judges and 
34 employees form the workforce of the court’s professional service– this is around 60% of 
the officially allocated posts. 
There were no developments on implementing recommendations from the analysis on 
rationalisation of the court network adopted by the government in October 2020. The analysis 
should serve as a basis for preparing a new strategy in this area. Drawing on the available 
data, conclusions from studies and cost-benefit analyses, reform in this area should aim to 
ensure better overall management of human resources and judicial infrastructure, ultimately 
leading to optimisation of the court network and the closing of small unviable courts. 
Full implementation of instructions for collecting statistical data in compliance with the 
guidelines of the European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ) remains a 
challenge. Issues also remained regarding the reliability and availability of statistical data for 
the judiciary in the absence of an advanced case management system. Data on the total length 
of proceedings is still not available. Statistical information on the performance of the judicial 
system is not systematically analysed or used for management and policy-making purposes.  
The implementation of the ICT strategy and the 2021-2023 justice development programme 
are pending.  
The efficiency of the justice system is hampered by the lack of effective systems for human 
resources and staffing, financial resources, ICT and infrastructure management. There is an 
urgent need for strategic investments in infrastructure. The allocated working space and 
working conditions in general at all levels of the judiciary are well below the minimum 
required European standards. There is an insufficient number of specialised judges and 
prosecutors and a lack of expertise in certain areas. Adequate ICT infrastructure and 
equipment in the judiciary is lacking. More efforts are needed to ensure the effective financial 
independence of the judicial system.  
Domestic handling of war crimes cases  
Montenegro continued to implement its war crime prosecution strategy, with limited results. 
In 2021, the Special Prosecutor’s Office conducted preliminary investigations in seven cases 
concerning war crimes committed on the territories of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia. 
In one case, relating to a request from Bosnia and Herzegovina for mutual legal assistance 
concerning one person, the authorities found that there was reasonable suspicion of the 
criminal offence. Another investigation was closed for lack of grounds for prosecution. Work 
on the remaining five cases continues.  
Montenegro continued its good cooperation with neighbouring countries. In 2021, the Special 
State Prosecutor’s Office acted upon 10 letters rogatory, and five letters rogatory from 2020. 
Good cooperation continued with the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal 
Tribunals (IRMCT). In the context of a file submitted by individuals believed to be 
Montenegrin nationals who are suspected of serious war crimes, one person was heard as a 
witness and exchanges continued with the prosecution services of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 


===== PAGE 28 =====
 
27 
 
Based on IRMCT recommendations, amendments are being prepared to the Criminal 
Procedural Code to proactively address the legal and practical obstacles to effectively 
investigate, prosecute, try, and punish war crimes in line with international standards. Work 
continued on legislative changes that would allow Montenegro to effectively investigate and 
prosecute conflict-related sexual violence cases.  
In October 2021, the High Court of Podgorica upheld an indictment against a suspect; the 
trial is currently ongoing. In June 2022, the Special Prosecutor’s Office submitted another 
indictment to the High Court of Podgorica.   
During the reporting period, 30 claims for compensation were pending before the courts, all 
concerning the ‘Morinj camp’ case. Of those, 27 were fully or partially upheld, awarding the 
total non-pecuniary damages of EUR 196 876.66. The proceedings on three remaining cases 
are ongoing.  
In October 2021, the Minister of Foreign Affairs attended the commemoration of the 30th 
anniversary of the Morinj camp. This was the first time for Montenegrin and Croatian 
authorities to visit the site together. In May 2022, for the first time Montenegrin authorities 
attended the gathering in Herceg Novi marking the deportation of Bosnian refugees in 1992 
and publicly apologised to the families of deported refugees.  
Montenegro continued to actively participate in the regional Missing Persons group and 
contributed to implementing the framework plan signed in November 2018. Cooperation 
continued with neighbouring countries under bilateral cooperation protocols. The list of 
missing persons compiled by the Commission on Missing Persons of Montenegro maintains 
records of 51 active cases who are Montenegrin citizens or whose families reside in 
Montenegro. Montenegro’s legislative framework still does not include a specific law on 
missing persons.  
Fight against corruption 
Montenegro has achieved some level of preparation. Limited progress was achieved during 
the reporting period. Last year’s recommendations were partially met. The track record on 
prevention of corruption further improved, in particular due to the positive trend of the work 
and performance of the Anti-Corruption Agency (ACA). However, more needs to be done to 
ensure the Agency’s integrity, and accountability, and to improve its tangible results, in line 
with the recommendations of the peer review mission conducted in 2021. To demonstrate a 
credible criminal justice response, Montenegro still must improve its track record of 
investigations, prosecutions and final convictions in the fight against corruption, including 
high-level corruption. Furthermore, the legal and institutional framework must be improved 
in line with the EU acquis and European standards, including for the effective use of financial 
investigations and asset seizure and confiscation in such cases. The sectors most vulnerable to 
corruption require targeted risk assessments and dedicated action.  
In the coming year Montenegro should in particular: 
→ review the legal framework and strengthen institutional capacities in the prevention and 
repression of corruption to address the issues identified with regard to its enforcement; as 
well as on financial investigations, and asset seizure and confiscation, to align it with 
international standards and with the EU acquis and European best practices; 
→ improve the track record on corruption, including high-level corruption, by imposing 
effective sanctions, and take concrete measures to improve the use of plea bargain 
agreements in exceptional cases for a more transparent, credible, deterrent and consistent 
sanctioning policy and criminal justice response;  


===== PAGE 29 =====
 
28 
 
→ adopt a new strategic framework, including to establish mechanisms for an integrated 
approach, for the prevention and repression of corruption to ensure overall coherence and 
improve interinstitutional coordination and cooperation. 
 Institutional framework  
Overall, there is a need to effectively establish an integrated strategic approach to prevent and 
fight corruption. Interinstitutional cooperation and coordination between all bodies involved 
is paramount, as is ensuring coherence, clear definition and understanding of their mandates, 
roles, and responsibilities. The ACA’s efforts on the prevention of corruption need to be 
complemented by a serious response on the part of law enforcement and prosecution service 
to combating corruption. Independent and efficient courts are also key to ensuring fair and 
timely judicial oversight and control of the actions of the ACA and of prosecutors.  
Prevention of corruption  
The Anti-Corruption Agency (ACA), established in 2016, is the key institution for 
promoting integrity and preventing corruption in Montenegro. In implementing its activities, 
the Agency co-operates with several public bodies, including the prosecution services and the 
State Audit Institution. The results of the ACA’s investigations are subject to court review. 
The Anti-Corruption Council, appointed by the President in July 2019 for a 4 year term of 
office, consists of five members and is responsible for the decision-making of the Agency 
and the appointment of its Director. 
Overall, the capacities of the Anti-Corruption Agency continued to be strengthened. This 
resulted in improved performance and increased efforts to produce tangible results. The ACA 
and its Council continued to demonstrate consistent proactivity in their work, including by 
addressing the caseload from previous years, and increased their outreach activities towards 
the public, media and civil society. 
However, the recommendations of the April 2021 EU peer review mission remain to be fully 
addressed. The mission focused on assessing the legislative and institutional framework on 
the prevention of corruption and to improve the capacities of the Agency, its performance, 
working methods and achieved results, in particular in the core areas of its mandate. 
Sustained efforts are required to meet the challenges relating to the Agency’s priority-setting, 
selective approach, and quality of its decisions.  
The Agency’s financial independence must be effectively ensured. The Agency currently 
employs 55 people, while the rulebook on the systematisation of the Agency foresees a total 
of 75 posts. The 2021 EU peer review mission recommended that additional human resources 
be allocated to the ACA.  
In 2021, the Agency developed the strategic work plan for 2022-2025, setting out the 
priorities in the work of the Agency for the upcoming period. 
The Agency continued its communication activities and worked with civil society 
organisations, hosting an open day for NGOs in June 2021. The ACA also organised several 
anti-corruption campaigns in 12 municipalities. Moreover, the Agency conducted anti-
corruption training, specifically targeting newly appointed public officials. In 2021, 17 
trainings for 197 participants were organised. 21 anti-corruption training sessions for 217 
participants were organised in the first half of 2022. 
In 2021, the National Council for the Fight against High-level Corruption, established in 
December 2020 to address systematic problems related with high-level corruption cases and 
to increase transparency in the fight against corruption, focused on serious and high-level 
cases, including tobacco smuggling in the Port of Bar. In January 2022, the Prime Minister 


===== PAGE 30 =====
 
29 
 
dismissed the Deputy Prime Minister from the position of President of the Council, and 
consequently three Council members resigned and have not been replaced since. The 
National Council has not met since January 2022. There are multiple overlaps of the 
Council’s powers with other institutions, most notably the ACA and the prosecution service, 
therefore its institutional role, relations with other bodies and its powers, as well as 
safeguards in this respect, still need to be adequately defined.  
Law enforcement 
In 2021, the Special State Prosecutor’s Office for Organised Crime and High-level 
Corruption (SPO) reduced its staff to 48 members (2020: 54), including 12 special 
prosecutors (2020: 16). The SPO’s capacity was boosted in June 2022 with the reassignment 
of three state prosecutors to the Office. However, further strengthening of the SPO’s human 
resources capacity, including through specialisation, is still required. Poor office conditions, 
which hamper the efficient functioning of the SPO, remain a matter of concern and must be 
addressed swiftly.   
Track record  
The track record of investigations, prosecutions, and final convictions in cases of high-level 
corruption continued to improve but needs further consolidation. 
In 2021, the Special State Prosecutor’s Office opened investigations into criminal offences 
of high-level corruption in 15 cases against 70 individuals and 19 legal entities (2020: eight 
cases against 35 individuals and eight legal entities). Three indictments were lodged with the 
Higher Court of Podgorica against nine individuals, and 11 indictments against 68 individuals 
and 21 legal entities. Financial investigations have been launched in seven cases against 40 
individuals and six legal entities (2020: four cases against 30 individuals and two legal 
entities).  
In 2021, 21 plea bargain agreements were concluded in four cases against 21 individuals and 
nine legal entities; of these, 16 agreements were adopted by the court ruling, one agreement 
was rejected, and four agreements are pending the Court’s ruling. In 2021, the High Court of 
Podgorica issued three final and enforceable judgements, resulting in a suspended sentence 
and imprisonment served in residential premises. 
The Special Prosecutor’s Office has launched investigations of two high-level corruption and 
organised crime cases; these investigations have led to arrests. On 17 April 2022, the former 
President of the Supreme Court was arrested on charges of suspicion of abuse of office and of 
creating a criminal organisation; the suspect remains in detention. On 10 May 2022, the 
President of the Commercial Court was arrested on suspicion of forming an organised 
criminal organisation, embezzlement, and abuse of office; he also remains in detention. In 
December 2020, Montenegro sent a new request to Serbia for the extradition of the former 
President of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro, after the reply to its request from 
April 2019 had not been answered. 
The legal approach to and track record on financial investigations and confiscation of 
assets for criminal offences in the field of high-level corruption needs to be substantially 
improved. In 2021, assets were temporarily frozen in three cases. There was initial progress 
in the use of extended confiscation in corruption cases, with a final confiscation in one case, 
and better understanding of the importance of launching parallel financial investigations.  
The need for a more deterrent and consistent policy of sanctions to improve the criminal 
justice response to corruption and high-level corruption remains to be addressed. The use of 
plea bargain agreements must be exercised with extreme care, for the right purposes and 


===== PAGE 31 =====
 
30 
 
observing all necessary safeguards. A legal cost-benefit analysis in the interest of justice 
should be conducted systematically when this mechanism is used. In no case can the 
sanctions go below the legal statutory minimum. To improve its effective use, guidelines for 
the specialised courts and prosecution services need to be drafted.   
The track record on the prevention of corruption continued to improve. Both the Agency 
and its Council demonstrated proactivity in their work and increased their outreach activities 
towards the public, media and civil society.  
Significant progress was achieved in the number of verified asset declarations and in the 
Agency’s application of in-depth verification procedures. In 2021, the number of 
administrative and misdemeanour proceedings initiated doubled compared to 2020. Despite 
the Agency’s proactive approach to investigating and penalising breaches of the Law on the 
prevention of corruption in the area of asset declarations and threats to the public interest, 
there is still a significant backlog from previous years, particularly concerning high-profile 
cases. 
In 2021, the ACA instituted 1164 proceedings before misdemeanour courts, which is more 
than twice to the figure for 2020 (510 proceedings). 808 proceedings were completed 
(including those from previous years) and sanctions were imposed in 88.6% of cases. In 
2021, the Agency issued 136 direct misdemeanour orders (2020: 42). The total amount of 
fines, including direct misdemeanour orders, amounted to EUR 149 242 (2020: EUR 89 659). 
In 2021, the ACA requested seizure of material gains before the competent courts in one 
case, and the courts approved confiscation in two cases. In the first semester of 2022, the 
ACA submitted 812 requests to the competent courts to initiate misdemeanour proceedings 
for violations of anti-corruption laws.  
Between January and June 2022, the Agency instituted 812 proceedings before 
misdemeanour courts, with the total amount of fines amounting to EUR 57 890. 
In 2021, the Agency issued 186 opinions (2020: 135) on incompatibility of functions and 
conflict of interest. Some 26 public officials (2020: 41) resigned, and two (2020: one) were 
dismissed. Between January and June 2022, 119 opinions on incompatibility of functions 
were issued; eight public officials resigned, and two were dismissed.  
In 2021, the ACA received 10 657 (2020: 8 108) income and asset declarations. Some 974 
reports (2020: 966) were verified by the Agency, exceeding its annual plan by more than 
10%. In 2021, the Agency initiated 295 administrative proceedings (2020: 138) and 
violations of the law were found in 160 cases (2020: 60). Sanctions were imposed in nine 
cases (2020:10). From January to June 2022, the Agency received 8 727 income and asset 
declarations and verified all reports. In the same period, some 390 administrative proceedings 
in the area of income reporting were initiated, a significant increase compared to previous 
years, and violations of the law were found in 205 cases.   
In 2021, the Agency concluded additional checks of 20 high-level officials and continued to 
monitor the lifestyle of public officials, using publicly available data and media reports. The 
ACA also initiated procedures to examine the lifestyle of three public officials, with one case 
submitted to the prosecution services. Further work is needed to effectively address the April 
2021 EU peer review recommendations on conflict of interest and incompatibility of 
functions and asset declarations. 
Concerning funding of political parties and electoral campaigns, in line with its 
competences the Agency oversaw all local elections held in 2021. A total of 36 irregularities 
in the reports of political parties were registered. In 2021, out of 141 misdemeanour 
proceedings issued by the Agency (2020: 62), 128 concerned electoral campaigns.  


===== PAGE 32 =====
 
31 
 
During 2021, the Agency processed six complaints relating to electoral campaigns. One case 
was forwarded to the prosecution service, which subsequently found no violations. The 
Agency organised 10 meetings with civil society organisations on monitoring, supervision 
and control of electoral campaigns in five local elections.  
In 2021, the State Audit Institution adopted the Manual for auditors on detection of fraud 
and corruption through audit procedures and the Guidance for presentation of audit results 
to the general public. The documents provide for an early response to suspicions of 
corruption and swift exchange of information with prosecution services, in line with the 
memorandum on cooperation between the State Audit Institution and Supreme State 
Prosecutor signed in 2018. The State Audit Institution published positive audit reports on 
annual financial statements from 2020 for 3 political entities, whilst regularity audits resulted 
in 5 positive, 4 negative and 2 conditional reports. In 2021, the State Audit Institution 
published one conditional report on annual financial statement and one negative regularity 
audit report for 1 political party. Based on previous data, the monitoring of political parties’ 
financing by the ACA and the State Audit Institution produced limited results. 
In 2021, the ACA received five requests for whistle-blower protection (three in 2020) and 
finalised five previous requests, awarding damages to whistle-blowers in three cases. The 
Agency received 142 reports on the threat to public interest (2020: 75), 28.2% of them were 
submitted anonymously, with 39 reports processed, and threats to the public interest 
identified in 15 cases (three in 2020). Ten reports were forwarded to the prosecution service, 
and 18 to other competent state institutions. The Agency identified irregularities in three 
cases.  
Between January and- June 2022, three requests for whistle-blower protection were submitted 
to the Agency; work on these is ongoing. In this period, the Agency received a further 89 
reports on the threat to public interest, with19 reports being processed, establishing a threat to 
public interest in four cases. Three reports were forwarded to the prosecution service.  
Further sustained results are needed, including by increasing the ACA’s human resources 
expertise, in line with the recommendations of the April 2021 peer review. Montenegro 
remains the only country in the region without a specific law on whistleblowing; the subject 
remains covered by the Law on the prevention of corruption2. 
On integrity plans, in 2021, 692 reports (2020: 679) on the implementation of the integrity 
plans for 2020 were submitted to the Agency. 99.3% of authorities have an integrity manager 
in place. In 2021, the Agency introduced evidence-based methodology for assessing the 
application of anti-corruption measures in public institutions. The State administration and 
social and child protection services were selected to pilot the methodology.  
On lobbying, the lobbying register includes six individuals and one legal entity. The new 
Commission on Lobbying was appointed and two calls for applicants were published in 
March and May 2022. The Anti-Corruption Agency participated in the work of the working 
group on amending the Law on lobbying established by the Ministry of Justice, Human and 
Minority Rights. Montenegro has yet to adopt the law.  
In September 2021, the government adopted the Code of Ethics for top executive officials, 
in the form of non-binding guidelines, to implement rules on prevention of corruption. 
However, no disciplinary sanctions can be imposed until the Law on government is adopted 
in Parliament.  
                                                            
2 According to the peer review experts, the law should lay down an obligation for the institutions to report to the Agency in 
cases of internally filed reports. 


===== PAGE 33 =====
 
32 
 
Legal framework 
In March 2022, the government launched a thorough analysis of the Law on the prevention of 
corruption that is expected to lead to several recommendations for its amendment.  
Key shortcomings identified in the legal framework for the prevention of and fight against 
corruption and its effective enforcement need to be addressed. The existing legal framework 
on asset confiscation needs to be reviewed and its effective enforcement must improve 
substantially, in line with the EU acquis, European standards and best practice. In this 
respect, Montenegro has yet to address in full the recommendations of the EU peer review 
missions conducted in 2019 and 2021 and the Council of Europe Group of States against 
Corruption (GRECO). Montenegro is preparing a new law on amending the Law on the 
confiscation of material benefit derived from criminal activities (‘the Law on confiscation’), 
which will be central to improving the criminal justice response to the fight against 
corruption. 
All shortcomings in the existing legal framework on political parties’ financing, including 
those identified in recommendations of the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and 
Human Rights (ODIHR), are still to be addressed. The current legal framework does not 
provide for effective safeguards and sanctions against circumvention of the rules, which 
limits effective oversight. The legal framework regulating political parties and their funding 
still depends on the political parties themselves. Limited progress has been achieved on 
amending the rules on calculation and reporting of in-kind donations, in line with the Council 
of Europe’s recommendations and aligning the annual financial reporting form with best 
accounting practice, which have been pending since 2014.   
In December 2021, draft amendments to the Law on free access to information were 
proposed by the government but are pending parliamentary adoption. A working group to 
produce guidelines for proactive publishing of information has been set up. These steps 
should pave the way for increased transparency and accountability of public bodies towards 
Montenegrin citizens. In 2021, 5 285 complaints in relation to free access to information 
were filed (2020: 4328) and 351 complaints (8.57%) were rejected by the Agency for 
Personal Data Protection as unfounded, while 4 095 complaints were reviewed3.  
Fundamental rights  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of fundamental rights. The legislative and 
institutional framework is largely in place and Montenegro continues to meet its 
international obligations on human rights. However, additional efforts remain needed to 
implement it fully. The reporting period was marked by increased societal polarisation and 
division. Most vulnerable groups in society (including Roma and Egyptians, persons with 
disabilities, LGBTIQ persons) were increasingly subjected to discrimination, hate speech 
and hate crime. An increased number of femicides with insufficient follow up by the 
authorities, publicly expressed misogyny, gender-based violence and violence against 
children are issues of serious concern. More efforts need to be undertaken to ensure access to 
justice and the enforcement of rights in administrative and judicial proceedings in particular 
for vulnerable groups. 
Last year’s recommendations have been only partially addressed and remain valid. In the 
coming year Montenegro should in particular: 
                                                            
3 The Agency’s Director informed the media about continuous abuse of the right to access information, pointing that out of 3 
491 complaints received in Jan-April 2022 almost half were filed by a lawyer from Podgorica in relation to payrolls of 
Podgorica school teachers. According to the Agency, these requests are not aimed at accessing data, but rather at gaining 
material benefits based on court costs (reportedly, several hundreds of thousands of euros). 


===== PAGE 34 =====
 
33 
 
→ revise legislation to: increase protection against domestic violence, discrimination, hate 
crimes and hate speech; comply with 2018 UN Universal Periodic Review 
recommendation to prohibit the statute of limitations for criminal offences of torture and 
other forms of ill treatment; fully harmonise with the 2020 same-sex partnership law; to 
fully align with the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child; 
criminalise all forms of marriage with a person under age 18 and to align protection of 
personal data; 
→ improve interinstitutional cooperation to achieve more efficient protection from all kinds 
of discrimination, better access to justice, full enjoyment of procedural rights, and free 
legal aid for victims of human rights violations and crimes, in particular children, 
women, persons belonging to minorities, including Roma and Egyptians, and persons 
with disabilities; 
→ ensure full operational capacity of the Constitutional Court and harmonised interpretation 
of ECtHR case law and European and international human rights standards throughout 
the court system. 
As regards international human rights instruments, Montenegro continued its regular 
dialogue with international human rights organisations and monitoring bodies, the United 
Nations, and the Council of Europe. Montenegro fulfils its obligations under international 
human rights instruments and legislation. In June 2021, the government submitted a 
voluntary mid-term report on the level of implementation of recommendations from the 2018 
Universal Periodic Review. In October 2021, the UN General Assembly elected Montenegro 
as new member of the UN Human Rights Council. On June 8 2022, the ‘Marrakesh Treaty to 
Facilitate Access to Published Works for Persons who are Blind, Visually Impaired or 
Otherwise Print Disabled’ entered into force in Montenegro, allowing for copyright 
exceptions to facilitate the creation of accessible versions of books and other copyrighted 
works. Montenegro has yet to ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the 
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW), signed in October 
2006, the Protocol of 2014 to the 1930 Forced Labour Convention, the 2019 ILO Violence 
and Harassment Convention (entered into force on 25 Jun 2021), or the 2019 Framework 
Convention on Tourism Ethics of the UN World Tourism Organization. Montenegro has yet 
to submit its reports to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights – 
CESCR (due in 2019), the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights – CCPR (due 
in 2021) and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial 
Discrimination – CERD (due in 2021). 
Montenegro continued to ensure good cooperation with the European Court of Human 
Rights (ECtHR). In the reporting period, 380 new applications concerning Montenegro were 
allocated to a decision body of the Court, bringing the number of applications pending before 
it to 291 on 15 June 2022. The ECtHR delivered judgements in six cases, finding five 
violations of the European Convention on Human Rights. While most violations related to the 
right to fair trial in connection with the length of proceedings, the Court also found one 
violation regarding the right to respect for private and family life. Currently, there are no 
cases under enhanced supervision by the Committee of Ministers.   
On the promotion and enforcement of human rights, institutional capacities need to be 
further strengthened, including by allocation of appropriate funding. Fundamental changes in 
the management and structure of the Ministry, as well as politically biased appointments and 
dismissals during the reporting period affected its effective functioning and resulted in a 
slowdown in the drafting of new human rights legislation, strategies and policies, and the 
implementation and monitoring of existing ones.  


===== PAGE 35 =====
 
34 
 
The regulatory and institutional framework for the functioning of the Ombudsperson is in 
place. It is accredited with ‘B’ status from the Accreditation Subcommittee of the Global 
Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions.  The Ombudsperson’s Office continued to be 
perceived as the institution with the best impact and trust regarding the promotion and 
protection of citizens’ rights. The views of the institution are often quoted in the media. The 
Office’s capacity to handle complaints and the quality of its decisions continued to improve. 
Following a reduction in the budget for 2021 of around 6% compared to 2020, the adopted 
budget for 2022 increased 7.6% compared to 2021. In June 2021, the Ombudsperson 
published a special report on the situation of children in dormitories and boarding schools in 
Montenegro. In 2021, the Office worked on 1 123 complaints (2020: 1 075), 968 of which it 
received in 2021 and 155 of which were held over from 2020. In 2021, the Office closed 904 
cases and deferred 219 to 2022. The closed cases related to civil rights, economic, social and 
cultural rights, prohibition of discrimination, rights of the child and the right to fair trial. The 
Office determined violations of rights in 124 cases and gave opinions with 343 
recommendations to the competent authorities. Systematic, effective and prompt follow-up of 
the Ombudsperson’s recommendations by the authorities improved.  
The decisions of the Constitutional Court continued to be harmonised with human rights 
standards and ECtHR case-law. However, there are still cases where regular courts do not 
follow the Constitutional Court’s decisions and interpretation of human rights standards. 
From the current backlog of 3 219 cases pending before the Constitutional Court, 2 967 
(92%) are complaints on human rights violations. In September 2021, the ECtHR established 
a violation of the right to trial within a reasonable time before the Constitutional Court 
(Siništaj vs Montenegro). This might put at risk the 2015 ECtHR position on the 
effectiveness of the constitutional complaint as a legal remedy at the national level. Due to its 
incomplete composition the Constitutional Court lacks the required quorum to take decisions 
and is unable to operate. 
As regards the prevention of torture and ill treatment, in May 2022 the UN Committee 
against Torture (CAT) concluded that Montenegro had only partially implemented its 2014 
recommendations on ensuring or strengthening legal safeguards for detainees, conducting 
prompt, impartial and effective investigations, and prosecuting suspects and sanctioning 
perpetrators of torture or ill treatment. The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture 
and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment (CPT) carried out an ad hoc visit to Montenegro in 
June 2022. Amendments to the Criminal Code to comply with 2018 UN Universal Periodic 
Review recommendation to prohibit the statute of limitations for criminal offences of torture 
and other forms of ill treatment are not yet in place. Shortcomings in internal control, 
protracted and inefficient investigations, lenient and non-deterrent sanctions, and impunity 
for perpetrators of violence remain causes for concern. The government needs to increase its 
efforts to conduct efficient, effective and independent investigations to address police torture, 
violations, and illegal use of coercive measures. CSOs conducting monitoring visits noted an 
increased number of police officers who are aware of and apply the April 2021 instructions 
on the treatment of detainees and people under arrest. An official evaluation of the 
instructions’ implementation is envisaged for late 2022. The National Prevention Mechanism 
(NPM) was strengthened through the appointment of a Deputy NPM in December 2021. The 
NPM did not work at full capacity for most part of 2021 due to COVID-19 affecting 
employees. During the reporting period, the NPM processed 91 cases, most of them 
concerning the Institute for the Execution of Criminal Sanctions (46) and the police (11). The 
NPM found evidence of inhuman and degrading treatment in two cases; seven cases are 
pending.  


===== PAGE 36 =====
 
35 
 
The NPM brought 27 cases over the conduct of police officers during the enthronement of the 
Metropolitan in the Cetinje Monastery on 5 September 2021. Of these, 21 related to the use 
of chemical agents, one to exceeding authorisation, two for restrictions on freedom of 
movement, two for destruction and damage to other people’s property and one relating to the 
right to information). In two cases, a violation of rights was established; in two cases, no 
violation was found, while in two other cases the applicants were referred for other legal 
remedies. The proceedings in the remaining cases, which mainly deal with the excessive use 
of chemical agents, are pending. Despite the introduction of visible identification markings 
(names, surnames, number of official badges, etc.) on police uniforms and protective helmets 
enabling identification and efficient investigations, their use is not systematic. 
Some progress was made towards implementing the CPT’s 2019 recommendations on the 
prison system and conditions of detention. An evaluation of the implementation of the 2017-
2021 strategy for the execution of criminal sanctions is ongoing. Staff reinforcement and 
capacity building continued, as well as programmes and activities available to prisoners. 
Existing prison facilities underwent some adaptation and modernisation. Preparations are 
ongoing to build a new prison facility in Mojkovac for the north of Montenegro, and a special 
health institution. Standard operating procedures for the prison system are being revised. 
Several NGOs implemented educational, recreational and vocational activities for prisoners. 
During 2021, juvenile convicts took part in various daily activities in the juvenile prison 
department, including sports, cultural and educational activities, and psychological and 
creative workshops for reintegration purposes. As of April 2022, there are a total of 614 
convicts and 403 detainees, 3.65% of which are women (2020: 2.6%). In 2021, the NPM 
performed 32 out of 40 planned monitoring visits to prisons, detention and reception centres. 
During the reporting period, the NPM reported one case of inhuman and degrading treatment 
in prisons (ECHR Article 3) and established in one case that the material conditions of 
detention result in a degrading treatment; one case is pending. The Ombudsperson also issued 
three opinions with recommendations but established no violation of Article 3. Despite some 
improvement, the material conditions in prisons, pre-trial detention facilities and psychiatric 
hospitals are still below international standards. Pre-trial detention continues to suffer from 
overcrowding, with 350 occupants for 292 places. Conditions in the overcrowded Dobrota 
psychiatric hospital remain very poor. 
On protection of personal data, Montenegro continued working on alignment with the EU 
acquis. The draft law on personal data protection is expected to be finalised in autumn 2022. 
Work is ongoing on alignment with other relevant parts of the EU acquis relating to 
investigating, detecting or prosecuting criminal offences or executing criminal sanctions. The 
human resources capacity of the Agency for Personal Data Protection and Free Access to 
Information needs to be further strengthened. The number of complaints is increasing, but 
overall awareness on personal data protection issues continues to be low. From 15 June 2021 
to 23 June 2022, the Agency carried out 105 supervisions in the field of personal data 
protection. However, the Agency’s work was blocked following Parliament’s dismissal in 
December 2021 of the President and one member of the Council for Personal Data 
Protection. In August 2022, the Parliament appointed a new President and one member of the 
Council and on 12 August 2022 the constitutive session of the Council of the Agency was 
held in its new composition.  
Several hundred compensation claims relating to protection of personal data are pending 
before the courts. The claims follow a first-instance court decision in May 2021 awarding 
compensation owing to the authorities’ publication of a list of individuals subject to COVID-
19 self-isolation measures in spring 2020, which was declared in violation of the 
Constitutional right to privacy by the Constitutional Court in July 2020. Montenegro has not 


===== PAGE 37 =====
 
36 
 
yet signed the 2018 Council of Europe Protocol amending the Convention for the Protection 
of Individuals regarding the Automatic Processing of Personal Data (CETS 223).  
On freedom of thought, conscience, and religion, the government and the Serbian 
Orthodox Church signed in August 2022 a fundamental agreement, amidst protests from 
CSOs, several members of the government and some political parties, leading to a no-
confidence vote and the subsequent fall of the government.  Religiously motivated attacks, 
for instance during the enthronement of the Metropolitan in the Cetinje Monastery in 
September 2021 or on a bus transporting children and young people from Niksic in Cetinje in 
April 2022, are a matter of serious concern.   
Freedom of expression  
Montenegro has a pluralistic media environment and has achieved some level of preparation 
on freedom of expression. Limited progress was made on last year’s recommendations. 
There were improvements to the legal framework on protection for journalists and other 
media workers was improved. Although the initial institutional response to recent cases of 
violence against journalists has been generally prompt, lack of effective judicial follow-up on 
important old cases remains a matter of serious concern. The findings and recommendations 
of the new ad hoc commission for monitoring violence against the media need to be 
effectively addressed by the relevant authorities. The revision of the legal framework and the 
drafting of the media strategy are yet to be streamlined in order to ensure mutual consistency 
and full alignment with the EU acquis and relevant European standards. Sustained efforts are 
needed to counter disinformation and limit the effects of online harassment and hate speech 
without disproportionately limiting freedom of expression. The public broadcaster RTCG 
continued to produce politically balanced and diverse content. Deep political polarisation of 
the media scene persisted, while growing competition from big regional media placed 
additional strain on the local media market. Further sustained efforts are needed to establish 
effective self-regulatory mechanisms. 
Last year’s recommendations were only partly addressed, and they remain valid. In 
addressing the shortcomings, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ strengthen the effective protection of journalists and other media workers, through the full 
and effective judicial follow-up of threats and attacks, including old cases; 
→ refrain from any action, either political, legislative or administrative, that threatens to 
undermine the editorial, institutional or financial independence of the public broadcaster 
and continue restoring its editorial independence and professional standards; 
→ streamline the revision of media legislation and the drafting of the media strategy, 
through inclusive dialogue with media and civil society, and in line with the EU acquis 
and relevant European standards. 
Intimidation of journalists 
The institutional and law enforcement response to address new cases of violence against 
journalists and media workers has improved. However, there has been no breakthrough in 
critical old cases, including the 2004 murder of the editor-in-chief of the daily newspaper 
Dan. In December 2021, the police arrested two individuals, one of whom a police officer, on 
suspicion of being involved in the 2018 shooting of an investigative journalist. However, 
effective judicial follow-up of the case is yet to be ensured. In 2021, the authorities registered 
24 cases of violence against journalists, predominantly involving threats, intimidation or 
harassment, but also including instances of physical violence. Between 15 June 2021 and 6 
June 2022, the prosecution service dealt with 14 cases of violence against journalists and 


===== PAGE 38 =====
 
37 
 
attacks on their property, filing indictments in six of those cases and dismissing criminal 
charges in two. In one case, misdemeanour proceedings were launched, while a preliminary 
investigation was ongoing in the remaining five. In 2021, the police registered 23 cases of 
violence against journalists or media workers. 
On 25 May, the Supreme Court upheld the appeal quashing the High Court’s and Appellate 
Court’s verdicts on the case of investigative journalist Jovo Martinovic, who was sentenced 
to a year in prison for involvement in drug smuggling while he was conducting journalistic 
investigations.  
The government adopted two reports by the new ad hoc commission for monitoring violence 
against the media, in October 2021 and in March 2022, and instructed its General Secretariat 
to present the reports to the Supreme State Prosecutor’s Office. The commission found that 
the police and the prosecution service had taken all steps within their power to solve certain 
cases. In other cases, however, certain omissions and need for a more agile response from the 
authorities were noted. The authorities need to ensure effective follow-up of the 
Commission’s recommendations, while providing it with all the necessary means to 
effectively perform its work. Specific recommendations from the previous commission 
concerning critical old cases of attacks on journalists remain to be fully and effectively 
addressed by the relevant authorities.  
Instances of senior public officials and top government ranks engaging in strongly worded 
public criticism of the work of both public and private media outlets continued to occur. The 
authorities should promote and preserve an environment conducive to investigative 
journalism and media freedom by promptly reacting to and publicly condemning hate speech 
and threats, and by refraining from exercising political pressure on journalists, including 
through their public statements. 
Legislative environment 
In December 2021, Parliament adopted a set of amendments to the Criminal Code providing 
penalties that are more stringent in cases of violence against journalists. Under the amended 
legislation journalists are granted the status of persons who perform duties of public interest, 
while several criminal offences, including murder, infliction of serious bodily injuries, 
coercion by using force or threat and endangering of safety, will carry longer prison 
sentences when committed against journalists. The legal amendments also introduce longer 
prison sentences for unlawful obstruction and prevention of the production and distribution of 
media content.  
The working group tasked with drafting amendments to the RTCG Law, the Media Law and 
the new Law on audio-visual media services has advanced in its work, including with the 
meaningful involvement of civic stakeholders. In March 2022, the Ministry of Public 
Administration, Digital Society and Media organised public consultations on the draft media 
strategy for 2022-2026 and the action plan for 2022-2023. So far, both legislative and policy 
reform processes have been managed through an inclusive approach, with active involvement 
of stakeholders from the public sector, civil society and the media. The adoption of the draft 
media laws and strategy are pending. 
Implementation of legislation/institutions 
The application of the journalistic Code of Ethics and Professional Standards remains uneven 
across the media community, as the media scene continues to be highly politically polarised, 
with weak self-regulation mechanisms. A working group comprising representatives of 
several self-regulatory authorities produced a set of guidelines for journalistic due diligence 
as set out in the 2020 Media Law, although these are not binding. 


===== PAGE 39 =====
 
38 
 
Public service broadcaster 
The public broadcaster Radio Televizija Crne Gore (Radio Television of Montenegro – 
RTCG) continued to pursue a balanced editorial policy, featuring politically diverse content. 
In November 2021, the government decided to submit to Parliament several draft laws that 
proposed to abolish fixed budgetary allocations legally guaranteed to several institutions, 
including RTCG. The decision was criticised by the European Broadcasting Union as 
seriously undermining RTCG’s governing, managerial and financial independence. 
Eventually, the Ministry of Finance announced that the draft laws would be temporarily 
withdrawn pending additional consultations with relevant stakeholders. The issue of an 
efficient legal remedy in cases of dismissals of RTCG Council members by Parliament is yet 
to be addressed, either through case-law or through legislation.  
Economic factors 
One of the four nationally circulated daily newspapers was shut down in December 2021, 
unable to cope with a dire economic situation exacerbated by the COVID-19 crisis. The 
growing interest of big regional media companies in the national media market creates 
increasingly intense competition and limits the revenues for small local media outlets. In 
December 2021, the Ministry of Public Administration, Digital Society and Media allocated 
approximately EUR 300 000 in grants for 36 print and online media projects from the Media 
Pluralism and Diversity Fund established under the 2020 Media Law. In June 2022, the 
Council of the Agency for Electronic Media awarded, from the same Fund, approximately 
EUR 220 000 in grants to 11 broadcasters. In addition, the authorities continued to provide 
different forms of financial support to media outlets against the fallout of the COVID-19 
crisis, including through exemption of broadcasting fees for 2022.  
Internet 
In April 2022, the Council of the Agency for Electronic Media (AEM) instructed all 
providers of audio-visual media services in Montenegro to suspend the broadcasting of 
Russian state-controlled media RT and Sputnik, including through transmission or 
distribution by any means such as cable, satellite, IP-TV, internet service providers, internet 
video-sharing platforms or applications, whether new or pre-installed. Disinformation, online 
harassment and hate speech remain a frequent occurrence, including on social media pages 
and comments sections of online media outlets. The legal requirement for the removal of 
illegal third-party comments from online media platforms should be formulated in a manner 
that does not place an undue administrative burden on online media, particularly on smaller 
services.  
Along with more than 60 international partners, Montenegro signed the Declaration for the 
Future of Internet of 28 April 20224, which sets out the vision and principles of a trusted 
Internet. 
Freedom of artistic expression 
Freedom of artistic creation and publication of works of art is guaranteed by the Constitution. 
As part of the public health measures to curb the spread of COVID-19, the health authorities 
imposed temporary bans on artistic performances in public spaces, in particular on live 
performances of musicians. The bans were lifted as the COVID-19 situation improved.  
Professional organisations and working conditions 
                                                            
4 Declaration for the Future of Internet | Shaping Europe’s digital future (europa.eu) 


===== PAGE 40 =====
 
39 
 
Journalists continued to report overall poor working conditions, including low salaries, 
unpaid overtime work, security risks and different forms of pressure and undue influence on 
their work, both from media owners and third parties. The trend of media outlets and 
journalists launching defamation lawsuits against their competitors has continued. The socio-
economic situation and working conditions are particularly difficult in local public 
broadcasters, which are directly exposed to editorial influence and financial control by local 
authorities.  
(See also Chapter 10 – Digital transition and media)  
Freedom of assembly and association continued to be broadly respected during the 
reporting period and most unannounced gatherings were held peacefully. The Law on 
freedom of assembly is still unevenly applied, including arrests and fines, depending on the 
nature of the public gathering. Amendments to the Law on public assemblies and public 
events to regulate more precisely spontaneous assemblies are still outstanding. In 2021, 287 
public assemblies took place (2020: 247). The police issued eight decisions on temporarily 
banning public assemblies, while there were no disruptions or restrictions of reported public 
assemblies. The mass gatherings during the enthronement of the Metropolitan in the Cetinje 
Monastery on 5 September 2021 had not been announced to the police, thus preventing them 
from taking appropriate security measures. Violent clashes between police and some 
protesters took place amidst the otherwise peaceful religious ceremony. Formal investigations 
into the use of excessive force and torture by the police are ongoing. Following the proposal 
to form a minority government in January 2022, protests took place all over the country.  
Regarding property rights, some progress was made in addressing shortcomings in the 
expropriation of land in the coastal zone, as identified by the ECtHR. The legal opinions of 
the Supreme and Constitutional Courts in the application of property rights have been 
harmonised to a certain extent. However, the process of restitution of properties expropriated 
in the past remains slow despite repeated opinions of the Ombudsperson, and Montenegro 
still needs to ensure fair restitution proceedings within a reasonable time. Women continue to 
face difficulties when claiming inheritance and property rights in divorce proceedings. 
On non-discrimination, work to ensure full compliance with the EU acquis and European 
standards on anti-discrimination is ongoing. Following recommendations of EU-funded 
experts, in November 2021 the Ministry of Justice, Human and Minority Rights decided to 
draft a completely new law on prohibition of discrimination that would meet European anti-
discrimination standards, comply with the 2017 recommendations of the European 
Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI), and provide quality protection against 
discrimination to all citizens. Work is ongoing to draft a new law.  
The reporting period was marked by high societal polarisation and division. The most 
vulnerable groups in society (including Roma and Egyptians, persons with disabilities, 
LGBTIQ persons) were increasingly subjected to discrimination, hate speech and hate 
crimes. The increase in hate speech persists, particularly against women in politics. There is 
an urgent need to eradicate all forms of discrimination by using legal protection mechanisms 
and to address deeply rooted societal behaviours that degrade and discriminate against 
women, resulting in instances of gender-based violence. Accepting and respecting pluralism 
in society needs to be addressed from an early age through engagement with young people 
and adults to promote behavioural changes and tolerance of diversity. The Ombudsperson’s 
capacity to serve as inequality body continued to improve, although the overall institutional 
framework needs to be improved. In 2021, the Ombudsperson’s Office received 173 
complaints of discrimination (2020: 159 cases). The majority concerned labour and 
employment, social services, domestic and gender-based violence and proceedings before 


===== PAGE 41 =====
 
40 
 
public authorities. Ten complaints were received regarding hate/discrimination on the 
internet. The 2017 priority recommendation of the ECRI to put in place a system for 
collection of disaggregated data on hate crime is yet to be implemented as it depends on the 
reform of the Criminal Code (amendments on bias motives), which is expected later in 2022. 
On gender equality, the shortcomings identified by the evaluation of the 2017-2021 action 
plan remain largely unaddressed.  
In July 2021, the government adopted the 2021-2025 national strategy for gender equality, its 
action plan for 2021-2022 and the final report on the implementation of the 2017-2021action 
plan for achieving gender equality. The strategy introduced some important novelties that 
could contribute towards improving women’s rights and gender equality in Montenegro. 
These include suggestions from specialised NGOs for better gender mainstreaming of public 
policies, an increase in the election quota for the less represented gender, and the 
establishment of an alimony fund. However, Montenegro must address the issue of gender-
based violence and domestic violence in the strategy.  The legislative framework on gender 
equality still has a limited impact due to insufficient political will to prioritise this issue in the 
overall governmental accountability mechanisms.  
Difficulties remain, notably in relation to female labour market participation and vocational 
training. Women also remain under-represented in political and economic decision-making. 
Women make up only a quarter of the total management in the public administration, often 
due to explicit or implicit bias in hiring, training and promotion practices. There has been an 
increase in smear campaigns, hate speech and use of gender-based violence against women in 
politics and public life. Women have been disproportionately affected by the COVID-19 
pandemic.  
Gender-based violence, in particular domestic violence, remains a serious and persistent 
criminal, societal and public health issue. Although some training and awareness-raising 
campaigns were organised during the reporting period, issues such as deeply rooted 
patriarchal norms and stereotypes, limited awareness on the part of both individuals and 
institutions, and to the lack of efficient systemic response and commitment to protection of 
victims, all contribute to further exacerbating the consequences of gender-based violence. 
There were no developments in the legal framework. Specialised NGOs registered an 
increase of around 20% in cases in 2021 compared to the previous year, and even of 80% 
compared to 2019, the pre-pandemic year, which proves that the pandemic and lockdowns 
resulted in an increase in domestic violence. It is estimated that most cases of gender-based 
violence remain unreported. According to judicial data, in 2021, there were 2 176 
misdemeanour cases of domestic violence and 282 criminal offences, showing that state 
prosecutors are much more likely to opt for a milder qualification of the offence, i.e. mostly 
misdemeanour proceedings are conducted, while criminal cases account for only 11.4% of 
the total number of cases. Reasons for this include victims’ reluctance to testify, and a 
backlog of cases. Further training and specialisation of judges is needed to address this. 
Montenegro has yet to adopt a new strategy on protection from violence. Cases of violence 
against women through digital means are also increasing, including cyber stalking and 
distribution of intimate photo or video materials, often followed by threats and psychological 
violence. The Ministry of Finance and Social Welfare set aside EUR 200 000 for licensed 
service providers for victims of violence in the budget proposal for 2022 and participated in 
the CSO-led campaign ‘16 days of activism’, which marked the fight against gender-based 
violence. EUR 140 000 have been allocated for financing NGO projects related to violence 
against women and domestic violence. The State does not provide enough specialised 


===== PAGE 42 =====
 
41 
 
services for women and children who have survived violence. Crisis centres and clear 
protocols for victims of sexual violence have not been established.  
On the rights of the child, the legislative and institutional framework is largely aligned with 
international and regional human rights instruments, including all areas covered by the UN 
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its protocols. Montenegro continued implementing 
its strategy for the prevention and protection of children against violence and its action plan 
(2017-2021). However, challenges remain over its effective implementation, primarily due to 
a poor accountability framework, inadequate and insufficient administrative capacities, lack 
of systematic monitoring and quality assurance of existing laws and strategies, and 
insufficient funding to ensure that children’s rights are enforced.  
The Ombudsperson’s Office received 165 cases relating to the rights of the child. The 
COVID-19 pandemic continued to have a negative impact on children. Besides domestic and 
sexual violence, peer violence at school – bullying – is an alarming growing trend. More 
efforts are needed to ensure child-friendly justice, in particular for vulnerable groups such as 
children who live in poverty, children with disabilities, children belonging to minorities and 
children living without parental care. The juvenile prison department established in October 
2020 continues to provide dedicated activities, including sports, cultural and educational 
activities, psychological and creative workshops, aiming at better reintegration of juvenile 
convicts. Montenegro does not have a juvenile justice law or strategy. The practice of 
arranged child marriages among the Roma and Egyptian communities remains a matter of 
concern. No progress has been made regarding the follow-up on the UN monitoring bodies’ 
recommendations to raise the minimum age for entering marriage. The Criminal Code is yet 
to be revised to fully comply with the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional 
Protocol (sale of children, child prostitution, child pornography) and legislation needs to 
address online child sexual exploitation.  
There is a lack of systematically collected disaggregated data on child sexual abuse and 
sexual exploitation. The National Council on the Rights of the Child met only twice (in June 
and November 2021). The Council’s Secretariat capacities need to be strengthened, so that 
the Council can effectively exercise its function as a coordinating mechanism at inter-
ministerial level. During 2021, the National SOS Children's Telephone Line registered 942 
calls (60% girls and 40% boys). More human and financial resources are needed for its 
proper functioning, better outreach to children and provision of quality support.  
In 2021, the number of children living in institutional care decreased by 11% in comparison 
with 2020; by the end of February 2022 the number was 115. Montenegro needs to accelerate 
the process of developing family and community-based services and deinstitutionalisation for 
children without parental care. Work on the strategy on deinstitutionalisation is ongoing. 
Essential services, such as family outreach work, parenting programmes, different forms of 
foster care, home visitation, counselling and rehabilitation of child victims are not provided 
systematically.   
Regarding the rights of persons with disabilities, following the termination of the mandate 
of the Council for the Care of Persons with Disabilities, the former government established a 
new Council for the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in December 2021, responsible for 
interinstitutional coordination. The decision on its final composition is outstanding due to the 
change of government. The 2022-2027 strategy for protection from discrimination of persons 
with disabilities and promotion of equality and the action plans for 2022 and 2023 were 
adopted in July 2022. Although a specific strategy for the protection of children with 
disabilities is yet to be adopted, several strategies in other sectors (e.g. education, social and 
child protection) include specific measures and activities relevant to children with disabilities. 


===== PAGE 43 =====
 
42 
 
The national legislation is still not fully aligned with the UN Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities, including with respect to a human rights-based definition of 
disability. Montenegro has not yet adopted an action plan to adopt and implement the 
recommendations of the UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Likewise, 
Montenegro has yet to adopt the law on professional rehabilitation and employment of 
persons with disabilities, which would also regulate the location and management of the 
corresponding fund. Limited progress was made in implementing the 2019-2020 action plan 
for the adaptation of public buildings for persons with reduced mobility and disabilities. 
Overall, persons with disabilities cannot fully exercise their rights in Montenegro and 
continue to face multiple forms of discrimination. Gaps must be addressed with respect to 
mainstreaming their rights across sectors and policies, and there is a lack of a harmonised 
concept of disability in the legislation. The reform of the National Disability Determination 
System, including the adoption of a law establishing a single body of expertise, is still not in 
place. It is important that NGOs and social partners are systematically involved in the process 
of drafting/amending relevant legislation and strategies and formulating projects. 
The protection of the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and queer 
(LGBTIQ) persons continues to increase. The ninth Podgorica Pride took place in October 
2021, with the participation of high-ranking government officials (Deputy Prime Minister, 
several ministers), and without any incident reported. In December 2021, Parliament adopted 
amendments to the Law on compulsory health insurance, the Law amending the Law on 
social and child protection, and the amending the Law on personal income tax. A reference 
recognising same-sex partnerships was added to harmonise them with the Law on Same-sex 
Partnerships. The report on the implementation of the 2021 action plan accompanying the 
2019-2023 strategy, which was expected for Q1 2022, is delayed due to the formation of the 
new government. More efforts need to be invested in the national focal point network, tasked 
with promoting LGBTIQ rights at the local level and monitoring implementation of the 
national strategy. Most activities of the action plan are implemented by NGOs, some in 
cooperation with the Ministry of Justice and Human and Minority Rights. In 2021 the 
Ministry of Justice, Human and Minority Rights allocated almost 35% more funds to 
LGBTIQ NGOs than in 2020. Limited progress is noted regarding the application of the 2020 
law on life partnership of same sex partners (same-sex partnership law). So far, 15 life 
partnerships have been concluded. A working group to prepare the draft law on legal gender 
recognition has been established. Hate speech and homophobic incidents against LGTBIQ 
persons, including by members of Parliament, remain a matter of grave concern. In 2021, 55 
reports were filed with the police against 57 people regarding discrimination against LGBTIQ 
persons. Demand for social services, psychological support and legal aid continued to 
increase due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as did the economic and social vulnerability of 
LGBTIQ persons. 
The amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code and the Criminal Code are ongoing. The 
objective of this revision is to fully align criminal legislation with the EU acquis and 
procedural rights standards for suspects and accused persons, and victims of crime. The 
amendments are intended to tackle the right to information and participation at all stages of 
the proceedings, unjustified prolonged pre-trial detentions, and insufficient protection of 
victims, in particular women and children, as well as the overall length of proceedings. 
Montenegro has yet to adopt the law on the treatment of juveniles in criminal proceedings. 
The revision of the Law on free legal aid is under preparation. Comprehensive data on free 
legal aid is lacking as it depends on the development of the new judicial information system. 
The budget implemented for legal aid in 2021 amounted to EUR 121 500 (EUR 146 483 in 
2020). A systematic approach to dealing with and providing information for victims is still 


===== PAGE 44 =====
 
43 
 
lacking. Montenegro still needs to abolish the suspension the law on victims’ compensation 
and secure sufficient funding for victims’ support. 
The legal framework and institutional mechanisms to promote and safeguard the rights of 
persons belonging to minorities need to be substantially improved, fully implemented, and 
applied. In July 2021, the government adopted the 2021-2022 action plan for the 
implementation of the 2019-2023 minority policy strategy, including activities of minority 
councils, local government authorities, and NGOs. Data on its implementation is not 
available. The equal treatment of minorities in Parliament was not ensured. Montenegro 
submitted its state reports under both the Framework Convention for the Protection of 
National Minorities and the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. The 
monitoring and evaluation of projects financed by the Fund for the Protection and Realisation 
of Minority Rights remain insufficiently transparent. In 2021, the Ombudsperson handled one 
case of discrimination against minorities referring to proceedings before judicial authorities 
(2019: two cases). The worrying trend of hate speech attacks and discrimination against 
minorities at local level continued, with limited response from the relevant authorities. In 
addition to several private media in minority languages, the public broadcaster RTCG 
broadcasts a number of TV and radio shows in the Albanian and Roma languages. The right 
of minorities to use and to be educated in one’s own language continue to be respected. 
National minorities are represented in public, in decision-making bodies and in the civil 
service.  
The 2021-2025 strategy for the social inclusion of Roma and Egyptians and its 2021 action 
plan were adopted in September 2021. The 2022-2023 action plan, along with the report on 
the implementation of the 2021 action plan, were adopted in August 2022.  
For the first time, and in line with 2020-20305 EU Roma Strategic framework, anti-gypsyism 
is addressed as a specific form of discrimination. Roma and Egyptians are the most 
vulnerable and discriminated persons belonging to minorities; their socio-economic situation 
worsened during the COVID-19 pandemic. In January 2022, the Roma Council submitted an 
initiative to Parliament to reduce the threshold for political representation of Roma in the 
Law on the election of councillors and deputies. The Parliamentary Committee for a 
Comprehensive Reform of Electoral Legislation is responsible for this issue. There were no 
developments in this regard. 
A National Roma Contact Point (NRCP) has not been nominated since August 2020. Instead, 
there is a Head of the Department for Inclusion of Roma and Egyptians, under the Directorate 
for Human Rights in the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights operating with limited 
funding, resources, institutional authority or ability of inter-ministerial coordination.  
Compared with the previous years, there is a trend towards increasing the budget allocated to 
actions supporting Roma inclusion, but appropriate planning and monitoring are lacking, as is 
financial control. In September 2021, the Ministry of Justice and Human and Minority Rights 
allocated EUR 320 000 to civil society organisations for 21 projects on the social inclusion 
and promotion and protection of human rights of Roma and Egyptians in Montenegro.  
During the 2021/2022 school year, 1 856 Roma pupils attended primary schools, with 207 
Roma in secondary education and 12 university students. There are also 192 Roma children 
in pre-school education. While there is an increase in the coverage of Roma children in 
primary and secondary education, a drop in pre-school and university education is apparent. 
                                                            
5 COM(2020) 620 final 
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/eu_roma_strategic_framework_for_equality_inclusion_and_participa
tion_for_2020_-_2030_0.pdf 


===== PAGE 45 =====
 
44 
 
The significant increase in the number of secondary school pupils compared to previous years 
also results from mentorship support provided by an EU-funded project. According to the 
2018 UNICEF Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey6, only 77% of Roma and Egyptian children 
of primary school age attend school and only 7% of children of secondary school age (15–18) 
in Roma settlements attend secondary school or higher, in contrast to the general population, 
where 88% of children attend secondary school. There were 22 Roma education mediators 
employed in 2021/2022 in seven municipalities. Overall, the quality of education of Roma 
children remains of great concern.  
The mapping of Roma settlements in Montenegro was completed in 2021 with the assistance 
of the Roma Cooperation Council. Altogether, 14 municipalities where mainly Roma live 
were mapped, including 32 Roma settlements. Challenges remain in coastal municipalities, 
where private land ownership may lead to evictions of Roma families who reside there.  
Even though around 90% of Roma have health cards, access to health deteriorated due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Currently, the Ministry of Health employs three Roma and Egyptian 
health mediators on a permanently basis. There is great need to increase their number, 
especially to facilitate access to health to displaced and internally displaced Roma. 
There were 1 335 Roma and Egyptians registered with the National Employment Bureau on 
21 April 2022 (739 female), which represents 2.6% of the total unemployed people 
registered. Around 96% of the Roma registered have the lowest level of education and less 
than 1% are educated to secondary level, which limits the range of employment 
opportunities. Public works and seasonal works programmes are continuously organised, with 
limited long-term effect.  
Roma and Egyptian mediators in health, employment and social protection are still hired 
through projects with limited duration and need to be fully integrated in the system and given 
permanent employment contracts.  
About one third (32.5%) of girls aged 15–19 and about one in six boys (15.8%) are currently 
married or in union7. There is still no evidence that child begging and child marriages are 
systematically addressed.  
In the previous period, Ombudsman received a few complaints relating to discrimination and 
hate speech against the Roma community. Complaints referred to hate speech, housing 
issues, and the employment status of Roma education mediators.  
The Romani language is not taught in schools.  
Regarding displaced and internally displaced people, from 7 November 2009 to 6 June 
2022, there were 15258 requests for permanent or temporary residence. Of these, 15142 
requests have been resolved and 116 cases still pending. For 12 402 people, permanent or 
temporary residence up to 3 years has been granted, 297 requests have been refused and 2443 
cases suspended due to incomplete or duplicated requests.   
On statelessness, in the period between the implementation/entry into force in 2018 of the 
new Law on foreigners and August 2021, nine people were recognised as stateless, while for 
11 the procedure for determining statelessness is ongoing, one request was refused, and seven 
requests were suspended. To address the gaps in the procedure implementation (identified in 
2018), the Ministry of Interior, together with UNHCR, started drafting amendments to the 
                                                            
6 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018, Montenegro and Montenegro Roma Settlements, Survey Findings Report, 
December 2019, available at https://www.unicef.org/montenegro/sites/unicef.org.montenegro/files/2020-07/UNICEF%20-
%20MICS%20izvjestaj%20za%202018%20-%20ENG.pdf  
7 2018 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey. 


===== PAGE 46 =====
 
45 
 
Law on foreigners, in order to strengthen the statelessness determination procedure, primarily 
with regard to procedural guarantees and access to rights during the procedure and upon 
recognition of stateless status. The legal amendments should enable Montenegro to fully 
incorporate international standards on statelessness into its national legislation and grant 
stateless persons the rights to which they are entitled in line with the 1954 Convention. 
According to UNHCR, there are currently around 500 people at risk of statelessness in 
Montenegro.  
Through close cooperation between the Ministry of Interior and UNHCR, the new birth 
registration practice for this specific group of people yielded results: birth registration of all 
stateless children in Montenegro known to UNHCR has been completed.  
On citizenship rights, despite the previously announced decision to end the economic 
citizenship programme in 2021, the former government prolonged the programme for an 
additional 12 months to December 2022. The current government publicly committed to 
phasing-out the scheme by December 2022; however, in June 2022, it decided to lower the 
requirements to apply for it. This scheme poses risks such as money laundering and 
corruption and should be terminated definitively. In its fourth and fifth reports under the visa 
suspension mechanism8, the European Commission recommended that Montenegro 
effectively phase-out the investor citizenship scheme completely as soon as possible. 
Montenegro has not yet implemented this request. 
2.2.2 Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security   
The EU has common rules for border control, visas, external migration and asylum. 
Schengen cooperation entails lifting border controls inside the EU. Member States also 
cooperate with Montenegro in the fight against organised crime and terrorism, and on 
judicial, police and custom matters, all with the support of the EU justice and home affairs 
agencies.  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of justice, freedom and security. The 
legislative and institutional frameworks are largely in place. Some progress was achieved in 
addressing last year’s recommendations, as Montenegro started revising its legal approach to 
financial investigations and took a number of steps to improve the efficiency of criminal 
investigations. However, last year’s recommendations remain overall largely valid.  
On migration, Montenegro signed a cooperation roadmap with the European Asylum Support 
Office (now the EU Agency for Asylum) and joined the European Migration Network 
(EMN), an EU network of migration and asylum experts, as an observer member. The 
processing time for asylum applications was reduced. Montenegro’s visa policy is yet to be 
fully aligned with the one of the EU. 
Montenegro is the Western Balkan partner hosting the highest number of Ukrainian 
nationals having fled the war, exceeding 1% of its population. It adopted a decision 
granting one-year temporary protection to people fleeing Ukraine, under which more than 
5 552 Ukrainians, mostly women and children, have registered so far.  
In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ limit the use of plea bargains to exceptional cases, in order to enhance the transparency 
and credibility of the judicial response to organised crime through a more deterrent and 
consistent sanctioning policy;  
                                                            
8 COM(2021) 602 final. 


===== PAGE 47 =====
 
46 
 
→ review the legal and operational approach towards financial investigations, asset 
recovery, the fight against money laundering and tobacco smuggling; align it with EU and 
international standards, and establish a convincing track record in these areas; 
→ further strengthen the capacities in border management by addressing the critical gaps in 
human resources and equipment; take the necessary steps to establish an Advance 
Passenger Information System (API) and a biometric migrant registration system that 
follows the Eurodac model; take concrete steps to fully align with the EU’s list of visa 
required third countries and increase the accommodation capacity for migrants. 
Fight against organised crime 
Montenegro has some level of preparation/is moderately prepared in the fight against 
organised crime. Some progress was made in addressing last year’s recommendations, in 
particular as regards the efficiency of criminal investigations. The full use of special 
investigative measures was restored. Legislative changes introduced safeguards against 
political influence over the appointment or dismissal of the Head of the police. A register of 
beneficial ownership was created. The administrative framework on firearms was improved 
and a new strategy on the prevention of terrorism, money laundering and the financing of 
terrorism was adopted. 
Some key figures from organised crime groups were arrested and another record of drug 
seizures was reached. The first joint investigation team with a third country was launched. 
The number of final convictions in organised crime cases is on the rise.  
However, the track record of court decisions on tobacco smuggling and money laundering, 
the use of financial investigations and the capacity to confiscate the proceeds of crime need to 
be strengthened. Montenegro has yet to address some systemic deficiencies affecting its 
criminal justice system across the board, including the way organised crime cases are handled 
in courts. This will require a more deterrent sentencing policy and a revision of the use of 
plea bargains in organised and serious crime cases. 
Last year’s recommendations remain largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in 
particular:  
→ continue to increase the efficiency of criminal investigations by establishing an 
interoperable system with a single search feature and by increasing the number of 
investigators and experts in key areas such as financial investigations, cyber-crime, 
forensics and special investigative measures; 
→ address the lengthy duration of trials and frequent adjournments in organised crime cases; 
ensure stronger mutual understanding between courts and the prosecution on key legal 
concepts such as money laundering and the quality of evidence;  
→ enhance the strategic monitoring of the criminal justice system by establishing a 
centralised database of organised crime and high-level corruption, collected from all 
relevant authorities, for analysis and policy-making purposes. 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
In 2021, the number of police officers rose to 4 586 (from 4 139 in 2020). The ratio of police 
officers remains high, at 730/100 000 inhabitants, compared with an EU average of 
333/100 000 (Eurostat, 2018-2020). However, unlike most EU Member States, Montenegro 
includes border guards in the police (1 307 staff members), as well as non-operational staff 
such as advisers and officers without police rank.  


===== PAGE 48 =====
 
47 
 
Montenegro continued to align its legal framework on the fight against organised crime with 
the EU acquis. Amendments to the Law on internal affairs, adopted in November 2021, 
addressed a recommendation from the European Commission 2021 annual report by 
improving safeguards against political influence over the appointment and dismissal of the 
Head of the police. Addressing another recommendation from the Commission’s annual 
report, amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code were adopted in December 2021, 
restoring the use of some special investigative measures in compliance with constitutional 
principles, a key step forward for the efficiency of investigations in drug-related cases. As 
from January 2022, the prosecution service could again use undercover activities, or 
“controlled delivery”, whereby a consignment of drugs is detected and allowed to go forward 
in order to secure evidence against the perpetrators.  
A new serious and organised crime threat assessment was adopted in March 2022, identifying 
10 main criminal groups and 12 threats to the national security of Montenegro.  
The strategic framework was consolidated by the adoption in December 2021 of a strategy 
for the prevention and suppression of terrorism, money laundering and financing of terrorism 
for 2022-2025 and of a cyber-security strategy for 2022-2026. Montenegro is Party to the 
Council of Europe Budapest Convention on cyber-crime and was among the 22 countries that 
signed its Second Additional Protocol on enhanced co-operation and disclosure of electronic 
evidence on 12 May 2022. 
Montenegro started reviewing its legal framework on asset confiscation to address the legal 
impediments to the recovery of the proceeds of crime, by drafting amendments to the Law on 
the confiscation of material benefit derived from criminal activities. 
On anti-money laundering, Montenegro has yet to align its Law on the prevention of money 
laundering and terrorism financing with the fourth and fifth EU Anti-Money Laundering 
Directives and to solve some implementation issues relating to beneficial ownership and 
supervision. The draft law on games of chance, intended to achieve alignment with 
international best practices, has yet to be adopted. The current law leaves substantial 
loopholes and increases the risk of money laundering and terrorist financing in this high-risk 
area, as legal safeguards against the influence of organised crime in the ownership structure 
of games of chance are insufficient.  
A register of beneficial ownership was created in February 2022, providing the authorities 
with information on the individuals ultimately owning or controlling the shares of legal 
entities registered in Montenegro. The Central Bank of Montenegro has a central register of 
resident accounts, but does not have a register of non-resident accounts, a crucial tool for 
investigations involving non-residents. The problem of an incomplete land cadastre, 
hampering the efficiency of financial investigations and asset confiscations, has not been 
addressed. Five new members of the Prosecutorial Council were appointed by Parliament in 
December 2021. In February 2022, the newly formed Prosecutorial Council dismissed the 
Special Chief Prosecutor, based on a disputed interpretation of legal conditions for old-age 
retirement of judges and prosecutors, following the adoption of the Law on pensions in 2020. 
His successor was appointed in March 2022. The appointment, at his request, of three new 
special prosecutors in June 2022 brought the number of special prosecutors to 16 (from 13). 
Human resources in the Special Prosecutor’s Office (SPO) remain nevertheless insufficient to 
cope with the workload, with up to 100 cases per special prosecutor. The precarious office 
conditions in which the SPO is housed remain below the minimum safety and work standards 
needed for the proper functioning of the institution. The appointment of a new Chief Special 
Prosecutor was quickly followed by the appointment of a new Head of the Special Police 
Unit (SPU), a police department focusing only on organised crime and high-level corruption 


===== PAGE 49 =====
 
48 
 
and working in close cooperation with the SPO. Further to these appointments, 22 out of the 
32 police officers working in this unit were transferred to other police units, leaving these key 
positions vacant. Six were replaced. The total number of police officers working in the 
broader sector of the fight against crime stands now at 83 (compared with 82 in 2020), 
including 16 in the SPU. This number remains largely insufficient to cope with the existing 
backlog and to absorb the ever-increasing number of new complex and high-profile organised 
crime cases. Both SPO and SPU lack sufficient specialisation of staff, due to their limited 
number. 
These human resources challenges are partly addressed in a rulebook establishing the internal 
organisation and job descriptions of the staff of the Ministry of Interior and the police, 
adopted in July 2022.The lack of human resources in key sectors of the police needs to be 
addressed as a matter of priority to ensure an appropriate response to the threats of organised 
crime identified in Montenegro’s serious and organised crime threat assessment. In terms of 
equipment, Montenegro’s police still needs to establish a modern case management system 
and software for processing financial investigations and IT forensic. A centralised database 
on organised crime and corruption collected from all relevant authorities is needed to process 
the track record and to serve reporting, monitoring and policy-making purposes.  
On firearms, the draft law on weapons, aligning the legal framework with the EU acquis on 
the acquisition and possession of weapons, is still pending adoption by Parliament. 
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
International drug smuggling and conflicts between competing criminal groups remain 
typical features of Montenegro’s criminal profile. Some Montenegrin crime groups are key 
players in international and large-scale cocaine trafficking and have the capacity to facilitate 
or control logistical aspects of transatlantic drug shipments, including using corrupted crew 
members. They are also involved in violent activities, such as contract killings. However, in 
2021 there were no gang-related murders for the first time in several years, something that 
has been a characteristic of Montenegro’s criminal scene in the last 10 years. Preventive 
investigations and police intelligence have succeeded in preventing several planned murders 
of police officers, judges and prosecutors, including of the Chief Special Prosecutor, as well 
as 13 murders of members of other criminal groups.  
Montenegro’s law enforcement agencies had key successes in the fight against criminal 
networks in 2021, including the arrest of leading figures in criminal groups, both in 
Montenegro and abroad in cooperation with foreign police services. This marks a turning 
point in the fight against organised crime. In these high-profile cases, cooperation with EU 
Member States through Europol’s Secure Information Exchange Network Application 
(SIENA) has been instrumental in the handling of the investigations. The shared intelligence 
also resulted in the arrest, in April 2022, of the former Supreme Court President while she 
was attempting to board a flight to Serbia. The charges related to suspicions of forming a 
criminal organisation and exerting unlawful influence. Her son and bodyguard are also under 
investigation in the same case. She had been the President of the Supreme Court between 
2007 and 2020, and in parallel President of the Judicial Council between 2008 and 2014. In 
May 2022, the President of the Commercial Court was arrested on suspicion of forming a 
criminal group, abuse of position and embezzlement in relation to bankruptcy procedures. 
Seven other individuals were arrested in the same case, including four bankruptcy 
administrators. In May 2022, using intelligence from EU Member States, the newly 
appointed Chief Special Prosecutor re-opened an investigation into three police officers 
suspected of involvement in drug smuggling and organised crime, including the son of the 
former Police Director for the fight against crime. The charges against them had been 


===== PAGE 50 =====
 
49 
 
dismissed in January 2022, under the previous management of the Special Prosecutor’s 
Office. 
In 2021, the SPO conducted 13 investigations into organised crime cases (compared with 25 
in 2020), targeting 103 people. Some 13 indictments were lodged for organised crime-related 
offences (from 29 in 2020) against 70 people.  
The number of court judgements and convictions continued to rise in 2021, reflecting the 
constant increase in the number of investigations in the last two years. There were 73 
organised crime cases adjudicated by the Podgorica High Court in 2021 (against 426 
defendants and 66 legal entities), up from 63 in 2020 and 22 in 2019. Some 10 cases against 
17 defendants ended in a conviction, all of them based on plea bargains.  
An external assessment of Montenegro’s sentencing policy, ordered by the Supreme Court, 
concluded that courts are not making full use of the sentencing ranges and tend to impose 
sentences in the bottom third or lower half of the sentencing ranges. Plea bargains continued 
to be widely used in organised crime cases and resulted in sentences, fines and asset 
confiscations that were disproportionally low given the gravity of the crime. Sentences in the 
context of plea bargains ranged from 2 and a half months to 3 years and 8 months of 
imprisonment and fines from EUR 1 500 to EUR 50 000. Plea bargains should be used with 
care and should be regulated by implementing guidelines to enhance the transparency and 
credibility of the judicial response to organised crime and to provide a more deterrent and 
consistent sanctioning policy. The special department of the High Court dealing with 
organised crime and high-level corruption cases has six specialised judges, handling some 65 
pending cases, against more than 500 defendants. The courts are not able to handle cases 
efficiently, owing to the insufficient human resources, critical housing conditions of the High 
Court and the numerous loopholes in the procedural rules. These shortcomings, which result 
in frequent adjournments, long trials (up to 5 years) and the allocation of cases to non-
specialised judges need to be addressed as a matter of priority.  
As regards the cooperation between law enforcement agencies at national level, some of 
the institutions concerned are now connected at a technical level, which paves the way for 
automatic and secured access to each other’s data. The special prosecutors, however, still use 
paper requests to access the required data. Training and capacity building are still needed to 
make the system fully operational. The Asset Recovery Office (ARO), established in the 
police within the unit in charge of international police cooperation, still lacks access to 
important databases such as that of the Customs Administration. International police 
cooperation continued to be instrumental in the fight against Montenegrin criminal groups in 
2021, as illustrated by the arrest abroad of 10 members of these groups. Some eight members 
of organised crime groups were arrested in Montenegro based on arrest warrants from foreign 
Interpol offices and fugitive searches. Additional police units were connected to Europol’s 
Secure Information Exchange Network Application (SIENA) secure communication channel. 
The number of communications exchanged with foreign police services via the Interpol 
global police communication system (I-24/7) and Europol (SIENA) amounted to 34 014 and 
1 334 in 2021 respectively (down from 48 634 and 3 998 in 2020). Despite fruitful 
international police cooperation overall, Montenegro needs to preserve and consolidate the 
trust of foreign police services by ensuring strict control of the information flow within the 
law enforcement agencies and the prosecution service. 
Montenegro continued to cooperate with EU police services through the European Network 
of Fugitive Active Search Teams (ENFAST), in which it has observer status. The country 
also stepped up its participation in EMPACT (European Multidisciplinary Platform against 
Criminal Threats). In 2022, Montenegro committed to participating in 63 operational actions 


===== PAGE 51 =====
 
50 
 
in 13 of the 15 EMPACT operational action plans, including as co-leader in four operational 
actions. In 2021, Montenegro participated in 21 EMPACT operational actions and was co-
leader in two of them. Montenegro also appointed a National EMPACT Coordinator. 
Montenegro continued to participate actively in Joint Action Days (JADs). Specifically, it 
participated in JAD South East Europe 2021 (promoting closer cooperation in the fight 
against firearms trafficking, the smuggling of migrants and drugs trafficking), JAD Mobile 4 
(targeting various methods of motor vehicle crime, including smuggling of stolen vehicles via 
the external borders, parts of vehicles, as well as associated document fraud) and JAD 
Danube 6 (focused on combating the smuggling of migrants, fighting trafficking in human 
beings and document fraud). 
Montenegro continued to actively promote police cooperation at regional level during its 
presidency of the Southeast Europe Police Chiefs Association (SEPCA) in 2021. A large 
number of meetings, workshops and assemblies were organised, gathering over 250 
participants from the SEPCA Member States. 
The working arrangement between Montenegro and the European Union Agency for Law 
Enforcement Training (CEPOL) was renewed in October 2021, providing Montenegrin law 
enforcement agencies with access to a number of CEPOL’s services and training activities. 
The exposure of staff from the criminal department of the police to CEPOL activities should 
be strengthened. Montenegro continues to participate in the CEPOL-led Partnership against 
Crime and Terrorism project in the Western Balkans (WB PaCT), which runs until October 
2023. 
The SPO conducted 26 financial investigations into 156 people and 11 legal entities in 2021, 
a stable number compared with the 25 financial investigations launched in 2020. In most 
cases, financial investigations are launched after the criminal investigation, with the aim of 
proceeding to extended confiscation. While the use of the extended confiscation procedure is 
a good practice, financial investigations should be launched in parallel with criminal 
investigations into organised or serious crime, to trace the financial flows behind the criminal 
activities. The capacity to detect and analyse illicit financial flows in crypto-currencies needs 
to be strengthened.  
The strengthened capacity of the Asset Recovery Office (ARO), established in the unit of the 
police in charge of international police cooperation, led to an increase in the number of assets 
detected and traced. In 2021, the ARO received 65 requests from foreign partners, to identify 
assets acquired through criminal activity, involving checks for 277 individuals and 31 legal 
entities. Seven requests sent by the ARO to foreign partners were processed, involving 
checks for 114 individuals and two legal entities.  
Despite this positive trend, there was no court order on final asset confiscation pronounced in 
2021 (compared with 15 in 2020). Two decisions on temporary seizures were issued, 
including real estate. The confiscation of assets of equivalent value, in cases where the 
proceeds of the crime itself cannot be found, still needs to be inserted into the legal 
framework. Montenegro needs to substantially upgrade its capacity to trace, detect and 
confiscate the proceeds of crime, in order to durably hit the financial power of criminal 
networks. The capacity to manage seized assets and avoid the loss of their commercial value 
should also be strengthened.   
In 2021, the initial track record on combatting trafficking in human beings was further 
consolidated. The prosecution service launched four new investigations and four indictments 
were filed against six people. Two final convictions were issued, while six cases against nine 
people are still ongoing. These cases are related to several forms of trafficking, including 


===== PAGE 52 =====
 
51 
 
forced marriages of children and forced begging in the Roma community. People in the 
Roma community, in particular women and children, remain at high risk of trafficking in 
human beings. In 2021 and the beginning of 2022, the Montenegrin authorities paid increased 
attention to the problem of children working and living on the street. The labour inspection 
services conducted numerous inspections of work facilities and checks on foreign workers, to 
detect cases of labour exploitation. April 2022 saw the launch of a new investigation into 
trafficking in human beings for the purpose of sexual exploitation of young women from a 
third country. 
Montenegro’s capacity to address trafficking in human beings in a coordinated and 
multidisciplinary approach continued to improve. Important training activities were 
conducted for various professional categories. State institutions closely cooperate with and 
provide financial support to civil society organisations on victim protection and awareness 
raising, including the promotion of the SOS hotline. CSOs were also involved in the work of 
the coordination body monitoring the implementation of the anti-trafficking strategy and in 
the victim identification team, which is in charge of identification, referral and initial 
assistance to victims. In 2021, this team identified five victims, all of which were minors, 
four of them girls. 
The authorities continued co-operation with neighbouring countries. In December 2021, a co-
operation protocol on anti-trafficking was signed between the interior ministers of 
Montenegro and Slovenia.  
Overall, Montenegro still needs to improve its capacity to prevent trafficking in human 
beings for all exploitative purposes, and to identify victims at an early stage, especially in 
high-risk sectors and with targeted action for particularly vulnerable groups, to reinforce the 
law enforcement response, in particular in detecting large-scale networks, and to enhance the 
support and assistance services for victims of trafficking, in particular for those belonging to 
vulnerable communities. A more robust criminal justice response to trafficking in human 
beings needs to be provided, with shorter legal proceedings, more deterrent sentences and 
systematic confiscation of the proceeds of crime. Montenegro still needs to improve support 
to victims in trafficking-related trials. In the absence of specialised lawyers and proper legal 
advice, many victims do not request the free legal aid they are entitled to and do not access 
compensation. In the context of the ongoing Russian war of aggression on Ukraine and the 
arrival of Ukrainian refugees in Montenegro, additional efforts by the Montenegrin 
authorities are needed to prevent the risks of trafficking in human beings.  
On firearms, the ballistic laboratory, the firearms’ focal point and the police department for 
international cooperation are now connected through the TRAFFIC database, enabling checks 
of seized firearms in international databases, an important development for increasing the 
efficiency of investigations. However, the ballistic laboratory still needs to be accredited. 
Some 556 weapons were seized in 2021, including firearms seized at borders, and 100 final 
convictions were pronounced for smuggling of weapons. However, most firearm-related 
cases continued to be processed as misdemeanours, while the number of cases concerning the 
illicit cross-border trade of weapons remained low. Montenegro’s Criminal Code does still 
not allow the incrimination of trafficking of firearms under a specific provision, as required 
by the UN Firearms Protocol. Montenegro’s data collection and reporting system on firearms 
have yet to be standardised, for both law enforcement authorities (on arrests and seizures) and 
the judiciary (on prosecutions and convictions). Reconstruction works at the Rogame storage 
facility for small arms, light weapons and ammunition were finalised in the third quarter of 
2021 to address the safety conditions there. 


===== PAGE 53 =====
 
52 
 
Montenegro’s involvement within the goals related to Western Balkans in the EU Action 
Plan on firearms trafficking remains insufficient and should be stepped up, in particular on 
amendments to the legal framework, awareness raising, outreach and education on the 
dangers and risks related to the misuse, illicit possession, and trafficking of firearms, as well 
as reduction of illicit firearms through legalisation, voluntary surrender, deactivation and 
destruction. 
The initial track record of investigations into money laundering continued to improve, but 
the number of cases remained limited. In 2021, the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) received 
299 suspicious transactions reports and sent 62 notifications to law enforcement agencies. 
Some 18 preliminary investigations and five investigations were launched. More money 
laundering cases reached the courts, including cases where money laundering is a stand-alone 
offence. However, the number of court decisions on money laundering remained small: two 
court verdicts were brought against three people in 2021, all based on plea bargains. In the 
first 6 months of 2022, nine money laundering cases were pending before the courts, of 
which four cases were stand-alone money laundering cases. The complex Atlas Bank case, in 
which 248 defendants were indicted in April 2019 for creation of a criminal organisation, 
money laundering and tax evasion, and which was sent back to the Special Prosecutor's 
Office, is still under further investigation. In 2022, the assessment of Montenegro within the 
fifth round of regular evaluation by MONEYVAL (the Committee of Experts on the 
Evaluation of Anti-Money Laundering Measures and the Financing of Terrorism) is under 
way. 
Montenegro continued to progressively strengthen its capacity in the area of cyber-crime. 
The police’s specialised hardware and software was upgraded, and the number of staff in the 
relevant unit increased to six. However, human resources are still far below the necessary 
level to address efficiently the threats of cyber-crime and cyber-enabled crime, in a context of 
ever-increasing global threats. Three preliminary investigations were launched but no 
investigations started. There was only one final conviction in the area of cyber-crime in 2021. 
At the end of August 2022, Montenegro suffered an unprecedented cyber-attack against the 
digital infrastructure of its public administration, which made numerous institutional websites 
and mailboxes inaccessible. The capacity of all relevant institutions should be strengthened in 
this area, including on the use of electronic evidence in court handlings, a crucial element to 
address modern forms of communication within organised crime groups. Montenegro should 
ensure effective, proportionate and dissuasive sanctions, including for legal persons, in line 
with the relevant EU acquis. Cyber-crime offences and cyber incidents often remain not 
reported. More awareness-raising activities about risks and threats should be conducted, to 
encourage the public to report cyber-crime offences. 
Montenegro remains a member of the WePROTECT Global Alliance against child sexual 
exploitation and abuse. Montenegro’s department for cyber-crime participated in Europol’s 
Say No! campaign. A video aiming to help parents and teachers raise awareness about child 
sexual abuse was translated into the Montenegrin language.  
To prevent tobacco smuggling, the government announced in July 2021 the future 
prohibition of the storage of tobacco products in the free zone of the Port of Bar, through the 
revocation, amendment or non-extension of contracts with operators in the free zone. The 
decision set deadlines for operators to remove their tobacco products from the free zone. At 
the same time, strengthened customs supervision measures were put in place at the entry and 
exit of the free zone. However, substantial thefts of tobacco products took place in this 
context, with tobacco products worth over EUR 10 million stolen from hangars in the free 
zone between December and March 2022. The customs authorities uncovered a smuggling 


===== PAGE 54 =====
 
53 
 
network in February 2022 and suspended seven customs officers working in the port, after a 
large quantity of cigarettes disappeared from one of the warehouses. In June 2022, a joint 
action of the police and the customs authorities led to the seizure of eight shipping containers 
carrying 4 000 packs of cigarettes worth nearly EUR 3.5 million. After the deadlines set for 
the removal of tobacco products expired, the Montenegrin authorities seized in May 2022 
145 000 master cases (equivalent to almost 1.5 billion cigarettes, worth at least EUR 25 
million) left on the spot by their owners. They further discovered a hidden warehouse 
containing cigarettes worth EUR 850 000 in June 2022. The Montenegrin authorities are 
exploring the possibility of putting the seized cigarettes on the market. However, the sale of 
tobacco products of unknown origin would be of severe concern as it would not be aligned 
with the EU acquis on tobacco control and would pose serious risks of further smuggling of 
the goods into the EU market. In August 2022, a smaller batch of 1,500 boxes of cigarettes 
originating from an earlier seizure was destroyed. 
A clear increase in preliminary investigations and investigations was observed in 2021, with 
39 criminal charges filed regarding 47 individuals and 3 legal entities. Five cases related to 
organised tobacco smuggling were pending before the courts in 2021. However, the number 
of final convictions remained low, with only one final sentence pronounced in 2021 for 
tobacco smuggling associated with organised crime, based on a plea bargain agreement. 
Montenegro needs more robust efforts to address the illicit trade of cigarettes including 
through a strengthened cooperation with EU competent agencies. This would involve 
strengthening the capacity of all institutions involved, enhancing the work of the whole 
judicial chain, dismantling the criminal networks, and increasing the track record of final 
convictions and confiscations of the proceeds of crime. 
On witness protection, the protection measures applied to seven people in 2020 were 
extended in 2021. In cases falling under the competence of the SPO, no extra-judicial 
protection measures were implemented in 2021 (compared with 25 in 2020). At the request of 
the International Criminal Court in The Hague (ICC), measures of protection and support 
were implemented for nine people. 
Cooperation in the field of drugs 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
Montenegro’s legal framework in this area is not fully aligned with the EU acquis. The 
national drug information system does not fully meet EU standards. A new Directorate for 
the Prevention of Drug Abuse was created in the Ministry of Health, in which the National 
Drug Observatory (NDO) is embedded, following its removal from the Ministry in February 
2021. The Observatory, however, has not addressed recommendations from the European 
Commission’s previous annual reports nor has it participated in the different training and 
capacity building exercises organised by the EMCDDA since 2021. The NDO still does not 
have sufficient capacity and budget autonomy to meet EU standards, and does not sufficiently 
fulfil its coordination function. The Institute of Public Health, the forensic laboratory and 
other institutions (including NGOs) dealing with drug-related issues have good technical and 
scientific capacity. However, security-related data collection on drugs is not compliant with 
the EU standards and the related security-related national data sets are not provided to the 
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA) in the requested 
form and timelines. The Observatory has still to become an authoritative source of 
information that prepares regular national reports on drugs in Montenegro and provides 
evidence-based information for drug-related national policies. 


===== PAGE 55 =====
 
54 
 
In October 2021, Montenegro reported to the EU early warning system on a new 
psychoactive substance identified by the forensic centre. The national early warning system 
(NEWS) is still not ready to be linked to the EU early warning system, as it has limited 
operational capacity, lacks defined procedures and sufficient involvement of law enforcement 
and health authorities. A new strategy for the prevention of drug abuse has yet to be adopted, 
as the previous one came to an end in 2020.  
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
Montenegro continued to be a transit country for drugs, as a part of the Balkan route. In 2021, 
the Special State Prosecutor's Office conducted nine investigations into drug smuggling, of 
which five were international investigations conducted with foreign police services. This 
resulted in the unprecedented amount of 4.7 tonnes of drugs seized in the country in 2021 
(compared with 3.1 tonnes in 2020 and 2.4 tonnes in 2019), mainly marijuana (3.4 tonnes), 
but also a significant quantity of cocaine (1.2 tonnes), along with heroin and synthetic 
substances. In August 2021, the police seized more than one tonne of cocaine, hidden in a 
shipment of bananas. The movement of the drug shipment had been monitored from a vessel 
in the Port of Bar to the end destination in a storage facility near Podgorica. Two people were 
arrested and are under investigation. A large illegal marijuana plantation of 860 cannabis 
stalks was detected, leading to the arrest of three Albanian citizens. Another plantation of 
1 300 seedlings cannabis was found, but the perpetrators were not discovered. The courts 
issued seven convictions for drug smuggling associated with organised crime in 2021 (down 
from eight in 2020), all of them based on plea bargains.  
In the first quarter of 2022, 15 final convictions were handed down in drug-related cases. Ten 
cases of drug trafficking at international level were pending before the courts, involving 58 
people.  
The insufficient storage capacity for seized drugs has yet to be addressed. Montenegro has 
not amended the relevant legal provisions in the Criminal Procedure Code to make it possible 
to keep only a sample of psychoactive substances as evidence for court proceedings, and not 
the entire amount, as it is the case now. 
Fight against terrorism 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
Montenegro’s legal framework is largely aligned with the EU acquis. However, the Law on 
international restrictive measures (a crucial piece of legislation in the context of international 
and EU sanctions) has yet to be aligned with EU standards, in line with the European 
Commission’s recommendations from early 2019. The current law does not address the 
application of sanctions beyond restrictive measures against terrorists, terrorist organisations 
and terrorist financiers. Further to the war of aggression of Russia against Ukraine, 
Montenegro adopted in April 2022 a separate package of restrictive measures, targeting 
Russian nationals, financial institutions and properties. A coordination body monitoring the 
introduction and implementation of international restrictive measures was established. A 
number of sanctions adopted by the EU remain to be implemented. 
Montenegro has yet to adopt a law on the processing of data on passengers in air transport in 
order to prevent and detect criminal acts of terrorism and other serious crimes, and to 
establish a legal framework regulating terrorist content online. Occurrences of right-wing 
extremist content on-line are on the rise in the context of national and international events. 
More efforts are needed to prevent all forms of radicalisation and violent extremism, 
including right-wing extremism and ethno-nationalism. 


===== PAGE 56 =====
 
55 
 
Further to the change of government in April 2022, Montenegro still needs to appoint a new 
national coordinator for the two key strategies in this area (on counter-terrorism and on 
prevention of violent extremism).  
Further to the signature in November 2019 of the arrangement to implement the Joint Action 
Plan on counter-terrorism for the Western Balkans with the EU, Montenegro continued to 
implement the planned measures. However, it has not submitted yet its fourth report on the 
implementation of the arrangement. 
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
The threats of terrorism and violent extremism remained relatively low in the country. There 
were no new departures or returns of Montenegrin citizens to and from foreign battlefields in 
2021. One criminal charge for terrorism was issued against one person, in the context of the 
protest against the enthronement of Joanikije II, the Metropolitan of Montenegro, in Cetinje 
in September 2021. An initial track record of investigations into terrorism financing and 
suspected links to terrorism was developed. The re-trial of the 13 defendants (including 2 
Russian and 8 Serbian citizens) found guilty of terrorism in the 2016 coup attempt case is still 
on-going after the first-instance judgment was revoked by the Appeal Court and returned to 
the High Court.  
There are currently no people convicted of terrorism offences in Montenegrin prisons. The 
prison administration continued to participate in several projects strengthening its capacity to 
prevent violent extremism and radicalisation. Montenegro continued to participate in the EU 
Radicalisation Awareness Networks (RAN) to support and enhance community engagement, 
and in various international projects providing capacity building in the prevention of violent 
extremism and radicalisation. A network of local focal points for the prevention of violent 
extremism is formally in place throughout the country but should become more proactive in 
prevention activities.  
Montenegro continued to cooperate closely with Interpol and Europol, contributed to the 
Terrorism Risk Assessment and Analysis for the Western Balkans and submitted data to 
Europol for the preparation of the Terrorism Situation and Trend Report (TE-SAT). The use 
of Europol tools and products for the fight against terrorism continued to increase. In 2021, 
some 203 messages were exchanged with foreign counter-terrorism units through Europol's 
SIENA communication link. Montenegro actively participated in the Western Balkan 
Regional Counterterrorism Initiative on counter-terrorism investigations. 
Montenegro’s threat assessment still needs to be conducted in a more analytical and inclusive 
way, to create a common understanding of the main threats and risks among the concerned 
stakeholders, with special attention to hybrid and cyber threats.  
Judicial cooperation in civil and criminal matters  
Montenegro’s legal framework on judicial cooperation in criminal matters is largely aligned 
with the EU acquis. Montenegro continued to align its legislation with the EU acquis on 
international judicial cooperation but has yet to become a party to the 2007 Protocol to the 
Hague Convention on International Recovery of Child Support and Other Forms of Family 
Maintenance, and to the 2000 Hague Convention on the International Protection of Adults. 
Montenegro has also not ratified the 2019 Hague Convention on the Recognition and 
Enforcement of Foreign Judgments in Civil or Commercial Matters. An internet application 
allowing the exchange of cases of international legal assistance between the prosecution 
service and the Ministry of Justice was established. 


===== PAGE 57 =====
 
56 
 
There was a slight increase in the volume of judicial cooperation compared with 2020, 
though it remained lower than before COVID-19 levels. Some 843 cases of mutual legal 
assistance in criminal matters were processed in 2021 (784 in 2020) and 701 cases in civil 
matters (671 in 2020). The main partners continued to be the Western Balkans and the EU 
Member States.   
Eurojust and Montenegro signed a cooperation agreement in May 2016, with the liaison 
prosecutor taking up duties in December 2017. Liaison prosecutors play an important role in 
facilitating ongoing investigations into serious cross-border organised crime and terrorism, 
given the increased number of cases that have connections with the Western Balkans. 
Montenegro’s cooperation with Eurojust continued. Some 17 cases involving Montenegro 
were opened in Eurojust in 2021 (from 23 in 2020), including three cases launched by 
Montenegro. A working arrangement with the European Public Prosecutor’s Office (EPPO) 
was signed in September 2022. 
In September 2021, Montenegro concluded for the first time an agreement with a third 
country (the Republic of Moldova) to establish a joint investigation team on a common drug 
trafficking and money laundering case, enabling coordinated searches, arrests and seizures in 
both countries. The joint investigation team was supported by the IPA II project ‘Countering 
Serious Crime in the Western Balkans’. 
Legal and irregular migration 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
Montenegro’s legal framework on legal and irregular migration is largely aligned with the 
EU acquis. The 2021-2025 strategy on migration and reintegration of returnees was adopted 
in September 2021, aligning the policy framework with the EU acquis and best practices on 
legal migration, asylum, and prevention of irregular migration, readmission, return, 
integration, internally displaced persons (IDPs) and statelessness. In June 2022, Montenegro 
joined the European Migration Network (EMN), an EU network of migration and asylum 
experts, as a non-voting observer member. Montenegro still has to nominate a national 
contact point.   
Montenegro concluded a readmission agreement with the EU and 15 implementing protocols 
on readmission with EU Member States. In October 2021, a readmission agreement with 
Georgia was signed, bringing to 12 the number of readmission agreements with third 
countries. The diplomatic steps initiated in 2019 towards Pakistan, Morocco, Iraq, Iran, 
Algeria and Bangladesh for negotiating readmission agreements were renewed in 2021 but 
remained unanswered so far. Negotiations of a readmission agreement with Ukraine have 
started.   
Implementation and enforcement capacity  
Both legal and irregular migration remained at relatively low levels in 2021 compared to the 
levels before the COVID-19 pandemic. There was nevertheless an upward trend in legal 
labour migration compared with 2021, which benefited from higher demand in the tourism 
and construction sectors. Some 38 676 temporary residence and work permits were issued (up 
from 34 755 in 2020). 
The number of migrants registered on the territory of Montenegro in 2021 slightly increased 
(3 405 migrants compared with 3 149 in 2020). A large majority of them were Afghan, 
Moroccan, Bangladeshi and Iran nationals. The main migration routes through the country, 
from the Albanian border to Bosnia and Herzegovina (less often to Croatia and Serbia) 
remained unchanged. From August to November 2021, the army was once again called in to 


===== PAGE 58 =====
 
57 
 
support the border police at the border with Albania. The Montenegrin authorities prevented 
834 illegal border crossings in 2021 (293 in 2020).  
There was no new investigation ordered by the Special Prosecutor’s Office into migrant 
smuggling in 2021. Some 104 migrants, mainly from Serbia, Türkiye and Kosovo∗, were 
detained in the detention centre for foreigners in Spuž.  
Secondary movements sharply decreased from 2020. In 2021, Montenegro readmitted 104 
third-country nationals from neighbouring countries under bilateral readmission agreements 
(312 in 2020), mainly from Bosnia and Herzegovina (66). Readmission from Montenegro to 
neighbouring countries decreased to 60 people (from 245 in 2020).  
In 2021, the number of voluntary returns from Montenegro increased to 36 people (10 in 
2020 and 41 in 2019). Some 30 returns to neighbouring countries were processed by the 
border police and 6 returns to countries of origin by the International Organisation for 
Migration. Notwithstanding the existing administrative obstacles (absence of consular 
missions of countries of origin in Montenegro), a more proactive voluntary return policy for 
those with no right to stay should be developed and necessary funds should be allocated. 
The EU-Montenegro readmission agreement and its 15 implementing protocols with EU 
Member States continued to be implemented satisfactorily, with the number of readmission 
requests from EU Member States and Schengen associated countries continuing to decline 
(153 requests for readmission of 238 people in 2021, of which 78 requests were answered 
positively). Institutional capacities for the reintegration of Montenegrin citizens returned to 
Montenegro under a readmission procedure were strengthened both at central and local 
levels, through a multidisciplinary approach and cooperation with NGOs. However, 
integration problems persist, such as school enrolment of returned children without a school 
background and access to jobs. 
Montenegro still does not have a modern migrant fingerprinting identification and 
registration system connected to a central biometric database. Instead, migrants’ fingerprints 
are collected using ink on paper. A masterplan laying down the technical requirements for 
setting up a modern system was drafted in close cooperation with the European Border and 
Coast Guard Agency (Frontex). However, significant investments are needed to actually 
establish the system (a crucial tool for the exchange of migrant biometric data between 
Montenegro’s key institutions) and to eventually connect it to Eurodac upon accession. 
Montenegro must continue its efforts to cope with migratory pressure, by developing its 
international cooperation on readmission, supporting the successful reintegration of returnees, 
raising its capacity to prosecute migrant smuggling networks and by setting up a modern 
migrant data collection system, compatible with Eurodac. 
Asylum 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
Montenegro’s legal framework on asylum is largely aligned with the EU acquis. The 
necessary institutions are in place to handle asylum applications. A cooperation roadmap with 
the European Asylum Support Office (now the EU Agency for Asylum) was signed in 
December 2021. The roadmap is intended to strengthen Montenegro’s asylum system, 
including the status determination procedure, the reception conditions, and to develop 
contingency planning.  
                                                            
∗ This designation is without prejudice to positions on status and is in line with UNSCR 1244/1999 and the ICJ 
Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence. 


===== PAGE 59 =====
 
58 
 
In 2021, Montenegro hosted 42 people with international protection status (37 in 2020), of 
which 8 were employed. The main countries of origin are Afghanistan, Morocco, Iran and 
Pakistan. The assistance package includes financial assistance, access to healthcare, 
education, employment, free legal aid, language courses and psychosocial assistance. 
Accommodation is provided for 2 years (with the support of the UNHCR). However, access 
to jobs and the relevant social services, and the proper acquisition of the Montenegrin 
language remain key challenges for people under international protection. Asylum seekers 
have no right to open bank accounts, creating additional difficulties in their daily lives and 
hindering access to employment. 
On 10 March 2022, Montenegro adopted a decision granting a one-year temporary protection 
to people fleeing the Russian war of aggression on Ukraine, similar to the activation by the 
EU of the Temporary Protection Directive. A coordination body was set up to monitor its 
implementation. The revision of Montenegro’s contingency planning in case of a massive 
influx is under way, with the support of the EU Agency for Asylum (EUAA). Some 
EUR 2 million from the state budget were allocated to the Ministry of Interior to provide an 
emergency response to the influx of refugees from Ukraine. 
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
Montenegro hosted 5 301 Ukrainian nationals at the beginning of the Russian war of 
aggression against Ukraine on 24 February, 2 148 on the basis of a residence permit and 
3 153 as tourists. Between 1 March and 5 June, 24 016 Ukrainian nationals entered the 
country and 16 398 left it. Some 5 552 Ukrainians, of whom two thirds are women or 
children, had registered under the temporary protection mechanism by 17 June 2022. 
Ukrainian refugees are mainly residing in private accommodation, mainly along the coastal 
area, either for free or paying a low amount of rent. A more coordinated middle and long-
term response needs to be provided, with the support of the EUAA. In proportional terms, 
Montenegro is the Western Balkan partner the most impacted by the influx of Ukrainian 
refugees, with the number of refugees exceeding 1 % of its population.  
The higher number of migrants entering the country in 2021 was reflected in a higher number 
of asylum requests. In 2021, 3 342 migrants expressed their intention to request asylum (an 
18 % increase from 2020), thus completing the first step of the asylum procedure. Afghan 
nationals formed the largest group even before the change of regime in Kabul, and their 
numbers increased after it. Although the registration of intentions to request international 
protection is possible on the whole territory of Montenegro, it takes place mainly at the Božaj 
migrant centre near the border with Albania, as the centre has the necessary equipment for 
collecting fingerprints and taking photographs of applicants in line with the procedures in 
force. 
The number of asylum applications, however, drastically fell compared with previous years. 
In 2021, only 272 people - or 8 % of those who declared an intention to request asylum - 
eventually lodged an asylum request, which is 50 % less than in 2020. Moroccan nationals, 
followed by Algerian, Iranian and Afghan nationals made most of the requests lodged. Legal 
counselling provided by NGOs is available to asylum seekers, as well as interpretation in 
several languages, provided by the Asylum Directorate. Most of the applicants left the 
country before the end of the procedure. Out of 63 interviews conducted, 14 asylum seekers 
received international protection status in 2021. Six more people were granted a protection 
status in the first 6 months of 2022. They all benefit from an integration plan.  
The processing time for asylum applications, which in previous years often lasted more than 
the regular 6-month timeline and sometimes even exceeded the exceptional timeline of 21 


===== PAGE 60 =====
 
59 
 
months, was reduced, addressing a recommendation from the European Commission’s 2021 
Montenegro report. Some cases continued to require a longer time, due to the limited number 
of staff in charge of processing the applications (8 staff members).  Montenegro’s capacity 
with regard to the status determination procedure still needs to be strengthened, in particular 
on the country of origin information and on key legal concepts such as the safe third country, 
to improve the country’s ability to deal with complex cases. The Administrative Court 
received 25 appeal claims against the decisions of the Asylum Directorate, as a result of 
which 4 negative decisions were annulled.  
A total of 2 688 migrants were accommodated in the country’s reception centres in 2021 (a 
stable number compared with 2 702 in 2020) including 750 women and 764 children. This 
reflects a change in the profile of asylum seekers, which now includes a large number of 
families. The total reception capacity for asylum seekers stands at 189 beds, including 25 in a 
centre for unaccompanied children that is not devoted exclusively to migrant children. The 
on-going projects aimed at increasing the reception capacity by expanding the existing 
premises are not finalised yet. The planned reconstruction works aimed at increasing the 
capacity of the Božaj migrant centre, with the financial support of the European Union, did 
not start. The authorities continued to cooperate closely with NGOs such as the Red Cross 
and the local association of psychologists for the provision of health, psychological assistance 
and other services in the migrant centres. However, Montenegro’s reliance on international 
donors’ assistance for the provision of services in the centres remains significant.  
Montenegro still needs to consolidate it asylum system by increasing its reception capacity 
for asylum seekers as a matter of priority, improving the status determination procedure, 
establishing an integrated service system for asylum seekers and enhancing the integration 
measures for people under international protection. Better preparedness for sudden influx and 
emergency situations, similar to the recent influx of Ukrainians refugees, should be 
developed with the support of the EUAA. 
Visa policy 
Montenegro’s visa policy is still not fully aligned with the EU list of countries whose 
nationals require a visa to the EU. On the contrary, in 2021 and early 2022, Montenegro has 
deviated further away from the recommended alignment. In May 2022, the government 
granted a temporary visa exemption to nationals of Saudi Arabia, valid from June to 
September, with the aim of making up for the decrease in tourists coming from Russia and 
Ukraine. In total, nationals from 13 countries - Armenia, Kazakhstan, Russia, Azerbaijan, 
Belarus, China, Cuba, Ecuador, Kuwait, Türkiye, Qatar, Kosovo and Saudi Arabia - are 
exempted from short-stay visa requirements, either on a seasonal basis or permanently. 
Seasonal visa exemption measures are not in line with the EU acquis, and these countries are 
on the EU list of countries whose citizens require a visa for the EU. In addition, foreigners 
having a residence permit in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) may enter Montenegro and 
stay in the country for up to 10 days without a visa. Several occurrences of abuse of this visa 
regime were detected by Montenegrin authorities. Montenegro should ensure increased 
alignment of its visa policy with the EU list of visa-required third countries. 
Under the post-visa liberalisation process, Montenegro continued to implement relevant 
measures to prevent the abuse of the visa-free regime with the EU and reported on it on a 
monthly basis. After years of continuous decrease, the number of first-time asylum applicants 
from Montenegro in EU Member States and Schengen associated countries increased in 
2021, with 250 applications lodged in 2021 compared with 140 applications lodged in 2020. 
Montenegro has 31 consular missions connected through its national visa information system.  


===== PAGE 61 =====
 
60 
 
In December 2021, Montenegro decided to extend the duration of its investor citizenship 
programme (‘Special Investment Program of Special Importance for the Industry and 
Economic Interest of Montenegro’) for an additional 12 months until December 2022. This 
was despite the previously announced commitment to end the programme in 2021, and 
despite the Commission’s recommendations to phase the programme out as soon as possible, 
both in the European Commission’s 2021 Montenegro report and the fourth report under the 
visa suspension mechanism. In March 2022, the Ministry of Interior adopted stricter internal 
and external checks for all applications, which resulted in freezing the process of pending 
applications for the time being. In May 2022, Montenegro established additional checks for 
applicants from Russia and Belarus and initiated a procedure to revoke the citizenship of any 
person who had been granted citizenship under the programme and is on the list of 
individuals under international restrictive measures. However, no such case has been 
identified so far. In June 2022, Montenegro lowered the financial criteria for applying to the 
programme. A bank guarantee amounting to EUR 1 million is now required, instead of 
EUR 2.5 million previously. The amendments also allowed the beneficiaries of the 
programme to add children born after the submission of the request to the list of family 
members granted citizenship.  
Between January 2019 and May 2022, 934 applications have been lodged (279 applicants and 
655 family members); 409 applications have been accepted and 3 applications rejected, and 
522 applications are being evaluated (152 applicants and 370 family members). In total, 333 
Montenegrin passports have been issued under the programme since its establishment in 
January 2019 (69 of which during the four months of 2022). More than 70% of the passports 
issued were granted to citizens of the Russian Federation. This programme poses risks such 
as money laundering, tax evasion, terrorism financing, corruption and infiltration of 
organised crime and should be terminated. 
Schengen and external borders 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
Montenegro’s legal framework is largely aligned with the EU acquis in this area. The 
constructive cooperation with the European Border and Coast Guard Agency (Frontex) under 
Montenegro’s Status Agreement with the European Union continued to yield results and to 
strengthen the capacities of Montenegro’s border police. Under the status agreement with the 
European Union, Frontex officers with executive powers are deployed at a border crossing 
point with Croatia and at the National Coordination Centre in Podgorica. In addition, the 
Police Directorate of Montenegro has had a working arrangement with Frontex since 2009, 
under which Frontex officers without executive powers are deployed to the country’s two 
international airports and its border crossing points with neighbouring third countries.  
In addition, a joint maritime operation to strengthen blue borders’ surveillance is being 
conducted, the first fully-fledged maritime joint operation implemented by Frontex in a non-
EU country. Cooperation also takes place through WB-RAN (Western Balkans Risk Analysis 
Network), within which Frontex and WB RAN member states prepare an annual risk analysis for 
the Western Balkans. Data is exchanged through the WB RAN network on a daily basis, 
providing a picture of migrant movements along the Western Balkans routes.   
Montenegro cooperates actively with Europol and Interpol on countering cross-border criminal 
activities, including through Europol’s European Migrant Smuggling Centre (EMSC). 
Montenegro conducted joint cross-border police operations through its participation in the 
European Multidisciplinary Platform against Criminal Threats (EMPACT) and during the 2-week 
Mobile 4 Joint Action Day Operation.  


===== PAGE 62 =====
 
61 
 
The situational awareness and reaction capacity of the border police has significantly 
increased since the establishment of a coordination centre in 2019. The authorities of 
Montenegro are aiming to upgrade this structure to a fully-fledged National Coordination 
Centre (NCC) compatible with Eurosur, including through close cooperation with Frontex. 
The coordination centre is connected to NCCs of Adriatic Sea countries, within a network 
exchanging operational information on suspicious and stolen boats. Two representatives of the 
coordination centre are deployed to Frontex headquarters in Warsaw as part of the SEA 2022 
joint operations. Eleven border crossing points are now connected to this centre, while two 
remain to be connected. However, some equipment and connections to other national 
surveillance systems are still needed to ensure full coverage of critical areas and larger 
premises are needed to ensure full functioning of the centre.   
The number of job positions in the border police is 1 346, of which 1 307 have been 
recruited. According to the Schengen action plan, 650 more border police officers would be 
needed. This lack of staff poses critical challenges in the field and triggers the regular use of 
the army to supplement the border police for border surveillance functions.  
Montenegro continued to implement its strategy on integrated border management and its 
Schengen action plan. Border management equipment continued to be progressively 
upgraded in accordance with the Schengen action plan, but reliance on EU and other donors’ 
support remained high. Substantial further upgrades are needed to cope with operational 
challenges and to improve surveillance of blue and green borders. Monitoring of the 
implementation of the Schengen action plan relating to equipment should be improved in 
order to prioritise the purchases. A capability development planning system is also lacking 
and there is no long-term plan on the development of human resources. The Ministry of 
Interior conducted an analysis of the Schengen action plan to initiate a strategic reflection on 
updating it, as the current one was adopted in 2017. 
The border police’s cooperation with the customs and the criminal police is improving. 
However, the border police’s insufficient autonomy in criminal investigations hampers the 
development of its analytical capacities and intelligence on smuggling networks. Montenegro 
has yet to establish an operational Advance Passenger Information System (API). 
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
Some 4 018 migrants were prevented from illegally entering or exiting Montenegro in 2021. 
Some 71 stolen vehicles were found based on Interpol warrants, as well as 927 targeted 
people (both thanks to Interpol databases and national arrest warrants) and 203 documents. 
Some 64 forged documents were seized.  
The number of border patrols on land and water increased, but the number of joint border 
patrols with neighbouring countries remained low in the context of the pandemic, with only 
437 joint patrols conducted in 2021 (723 in 2020), including 341 joint patrols on the border 
with Albania (570 in 2020). The activity of the Joint Police Cooperation Centres increased, 
with a higher volume of information exchanged.  
Montenegro continues to develop its cooperation with neighbouring Western Balkan partners 
within bilateral border traffic agreements. A new joint border crossing point with Albania at 
Zatrijebačka Cijevna-Grabon was opened with the financial support of the European Union. 
While the demolition of 29 cross-border alternative roads with Serbia, agreed in March 2019, 
has been completed on the Montenegrin side, 15 alternative roads to Serbia and 13 roads to 
Bosnia and Herzegovina still need to be demolished. 
 


===== PAGE 63 =====
 
62 
 
2.3. ECONOMIC CRITERIA 
 
In line with the conclusions of the European Council in Copenhagen in June 1993, EU 
accession requires the existence of a functioning market economy and the capacity to cope 
with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union. 
Economic governance has become even more central in the enlargement process in recent 
years. The Commission's monitoring takes place in two processes: the Economic Reform 
Programme exercise and the below assessment of compliance with the economic criteria for 
accession. Each enlargement country prepares an Economic Reform Programme (ERP) 
annually, which sets out a medium-term macro-fiscal policy framework and a structural 
reform agenda aimed at ensuring competitiveness and inclusive growth. The ERPs are the 
basis for country-specific policy guidance jointly adopted by the EU and the Western Balkans 
and Türkiye at ministerial level in May each year. 
2.3.1. The existence of a functioning market economy 
Montenegro has made good progress and is moderately prepared in developing a 
functioning market economy. After experiencing a sharp recession in 2020, the economy 
recorded a strong rebound in 2021 and kept growing at a steady pace in the first half of 2022, 
as the removal of COVID-19 restrictions buoyed both domestic and external demand. The 
economic recovery and rapidly rising inflation led to surging revenues and a very large 
improvement in the budget balance. The fallout from Russia’s war against Ukraine has been 
limited so far, notwithstanding these two countries’ very important contribution to 
Montenegro’s tourism in the past. Driven by surging global commodity prices, inflation 
increased significantly. The government adopted an ambitious fiscal reform programme 
(called ‘Europe Now’), to support the post-pandemic recovery while providing fiscal stimulus 
measures easing the burden on households from rising energy and food prices. External 
imbalances decreased significantly thanks to the rebound of tourism, while the situation of 
Table 2.1:
2019
2020
2021
Montenegro - Key economic figures
GDP per capita (% of EU-27 in PPS)1)
44
50
45
47
Real GDP growth 
3.6
4.1
-15.3
12.4
Economic activity rate of the population aged 15-64 (%), total1)
62.5
66.2
61.5
59.2
      female
55.8
59.1
54.7
52.9
      male
69.0
73.3
68.3
65.5
Unemployment rate of the population aged 15-64 (%), total1)
17.6
15.4
18.3
16.8
      female
17.5
15.9
18.8
16.1
      male
17.7
15.0
17.8
17.3
Employment of the population aged 15-64 (annual growth %)
2.7
2.6
-10.1
-2.4
Nominal wages (annual growth %)
0.9
0.8
1.3
1.4
Consumer price index (annual growth %)
1.4
0.5
-0.8
2.5
Exchange rate against EUR
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
Current account balance (% of GDP)
-14.0
-14.3
-26.1
-9.2
Net foreign direct investment, FDI (% of GDP)
10.7
6.2
11.2
11.2
General government balance (% of GDP)
-4.8
-2.0
-11.1
-1.9
General government debt (% of GDP)
62.9
76.5
105.3
84.8
Notes: 
1) Eurostat
Source: national sources
2013-18 
average


===== PAGE 64 =====
 
63 
 
the labour market started to improve even if structural problems persist. The banking system 
remained stable, and non-performing loans did not increase significantly in 2022 after the 
loan moratorium adopted in the context of the COVID-19 crisis expired in 2021. However, 
close supervision is needed to monitor and address risks in view of tightening financing 
conditions. 
Last year’s recommendations were partially addressed. In the coming year, in order to 
improve the functioning of the market economy, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ once the recovery is entrenched, implement a medium-term fiscal consolidation plan 
targeting further public debt reduction; 
→ strengthen fiscal governance by setting up an independent body for fiscal oversight; 
→ adopt a strategic plan to perform an analysis of all state-owned enterprises and prepare a 
proposal for the optimal portfolio of state ownership; 
→ develop and implement concrete measures to reduce the informal economy. 
Economic governance 
A broad consensus was maintained on key economic policy fundamentals 
notwithstanding changes of government. The last two governments reaffirmed their strong 
commitment to the EU path and related economic reforms. Important elements were the 
support to further diversify the economy according to a smart specialisation strategy based on 
partnerships between businesses, public entities and academia, and the continuation of the 
Europe Now programme, a major fiscal reform initiative introduced at the end of 2021 to 
support post-pandemic recovery. The government expects to limit some of the negative 
impacts from the war on Ukraine on the local economy by reducing taxes on basic 
consumption goods and fuels, providing support for agriculture production, and focussing on 
alternative tourist markets to compensate for the loss of Russian and Ukrainian visitors. The 
new minority government formed in April 2022, endorsed the conclusions of the Economic 
and Financial Dialogue between the EU and the Western Balkans and Türkiye on 24 May 
2022, agreeing to implement macro-fiscal and structural policies and reforms to foster a 
strong recovery outlined in the previous government’s Economic and Reform Programme 
(ERP). The policy guidance set out in the conclusions of the Economic and Financial 
Dialogue of 12 July 2021 were partially implemented. 
Macroeconomic stability 
A strong rebound of the economy in 2021 
was largely driven by a revival of tourism. 
After recording annual growth of some 4.6% 
on 
average 
since 
2017, 
in 
2020 
Montenegro’s economy registered one of the 
deepest contractions in Europe (-15.3%) due 
to the COVID-19 crisis and the large role of 
tourism in the economy. GDP growth 
rebounded strongly by 12.4% in 2021, 
following the reopening of borders and the 
ensuing robust revival of tourism. The recovery of tourism had positive spillover effects 
across the economy, including on net exports and, to a lesser extent, private consumption. 
Government consumption increased only moderately, as COVID-19-related support measures 
started to expire. Investment activity remained weak, contracting by 10% y-o-y in 2021. The 
outbreak of Russia’s war against Ukraine in February 2022 had so far limited direct impact 


===== PAGE 65 =====
 
64 
 
on Montenegro’s economy, as the country is not reliant on Russian gas or oil. However, 
Montenegro is exposed to Russia and Ukraine in terms of tourism and investment (the latter 
mostly in real estate). Further withdrawal of COVID-19 containment measures and strong 
growth in tourism activity boosted annual GDP growth in the first quarter of 2022 too, rising 
by 7.2% over the year. Domestic demand was fuelled by a two-digit surge in private 
consumption, while government consumption and capital formation grew at a more moderate 
pace. However, net exports had a negative contribution to economic growth, as strong 
demand and rising import prices broadened the trade deficit. Overall, the rebound of the 
economy brought partially back Montenegro’s level of per-capita income in purchasing 
power standards to 47% of the EU-27 average in 2021, compared to 45% in 2020, but still 
remains below the 50% level registered in 2019. 
The strong recovery of tourism helped 
reduce the external deficit. Montenegro has 
been recording very high current account 
deficits in the last five years, averaging 
16.5% of GDP since 2017. The current 
account gap narrowed to 9.2% of GDP in 
2021, compared to 26.1% of GDP a year 
before. This sizeable improvement was 
mainly driven by a surging surplus in the 
services account, which reached 19.5% of 
GDP in 2021 compared to 4.2% in 2020 
thanks to recovering tourism, and almost 
equalled its pre-pandemic level. Moreover, inflows from compensation of employees 
working abroad and from remittances also expanded in 2021. By contrast, the merchandise 
trade deficit widened to 39.0% of GDP in 2021 due to a fast growth in imports driven by 
stronger domestic demand and rising global commodity prices. The rapid increase in exports 
did not suffice to compensate for stronger import growth, as merchandise exports covered 
only 21.5% of total imports. The reopening of the economy resulted in a fast recovery in net 
FDI too, which surged 23.5% y-o-y in nominal terms and totalled 11.2% of GDP in 2021, 
thus surpassing the external deficit. Investment in real estate was almost 2.4 times higher than 
a year earlier. On the other hand, investment into intercompany debt dropped by 24.6% y-o-y, 
as local firms required less support from their foreign parent companies. The recovery in FDI 
inflows continued in the first half of 2022. The current account deficit increased significantly 
in the first half of 2022, by 31% year-on-year, driven by a sharp rise in the value of imports. 
The stock of international foreign exchange reserves declined from the equivalent of 6.8 
months of imports of goods and services at the end of 2021, to 5.3 months in the second 
quarter of 2022. 
Inflation has been increasing substantially but Montenegro has a very limited set of 
monetary policy tools to tackle it. Inflation remained low in the period 2017-2020, 
averaging 1.3%. However, since March 2021, higher food and energy prices kept generating 
inflationary pressures, with the harmonised index of consumer prices rising on average by 
2.5% in 2021 and by 4.5% y-o-y at the end of year, compared to -0.8% average contraction in 
2020. Russia’s war against Ukraine exacerbated price pressures and inflation has remained 
elevated throughout 2022. In the first seven months of 2022, consumer prices increased in 
Montenegro by an average of 13.7% y-o-y, compared to  (8.9%) in the euro areas. 


===== PAGE 66 =====
 
65 
 
Public finances recorded a significant improvement since 2021, but both revenue and 
expenditure reforms are still needed to support a sustainable consolidation path. the 
strong increase in budget revenue, together with capital budget under-execution and lower 
spending on goods and services, enabled a significant improvement of the fiscal position in 
2021. The budget deficit came in at 1.9% of GDP, lower than the originally planned 2.8% of 
GDP. This was a very sizeable improvement compared to the deficit of 11.1% of GDP 
recorded in 2020 or the average deficits of some 5.2% of GDP registered since 2017. Apart 
from the economic rebound, budget revenue was supported by the introduction of higher 
excise rates, the electronic fiscalisation of 
businesses’ cash registers, increased tax 
discipline 
and 
the 
transfer 
of 
public 
companies’ profits to the central budget. In 
2021, public expenditure declined by 2% y-
o-y, thanks to lower needs to finance 
COVID-19 support measures and social 
transfers, and delays in public investment. 
The 2022 budget, which was adopted in 
December 2021, introduced a progressive 
income taxation system and abolished 
mandatory health insurance, thereby significantly reducing labour costs, but also entailing a 
permanent reduction in revenue. At the same time, some of the planned revenue-increasing 
measures were rejected by the parliament while new social initiatives were adopted without 
accompanying financing measures, putting at risk the targeted budget balance once these are 
implemented in the second half of the year. With budget revenue boosted by the economic 
recovery and high inflation, the central government deficit amounted to only 0.6% of the 
projected GDP in the first half of 2022, compared to a deficit target of 5% for the year as a 
whole. On 25 May, the parliament adopted a budget revision as the new government 
established in April increased the number of ministries. 
A high level of public debt continues to be a key vulnerability, even though the debt 
ratio recorded a strong decline. The public debt stock reached a record high level of 105% 
of GDP at the end of 2020. In 2021, the government made use of its reserves to pay back 
maturing debt, which, combined with the strong economic rebound and the budget primary 
surplus, resulted in a reduction of the debt ratio to 83.3% of GDP. In the first quarter of 2022, 
the public debt decreased further, to 76.6% of GDP. However, with global financing 
conditions worsening, debt-related vulnerabilities remain high. 
Montenegro macroeconomic policy mix is constrained by the lack of an autonomous 
monetary policy and a complicated political situation compromising the efficiency of the 
fiscal policy. The unilateral use of the euro means that the Central Bank of Montenegro 
cannot influence interest rates and money supply, and therefore the country would need to 
tighten fiscal policy to constrain price growth. In spite of the complex situation, the 
authorities’ policy response managed to reduce significantly the budget deficit and public 
debt, orderly unwinding the COVID-19 support measures in 2021, and providing households 
with a significant increase in real disposable income since beginning of 2022. Overall, 
despite two changes of government (in December 2020 and April 2022) economic and fiscal 
policies remained broadly sound, notwithstanding some hasty social spending measures and 
overambitious public investments plans. 
Functioning of product markets 
Business environment 


===== PAGE 67 =====
 
66 
 
The recovery of economic activity has been reflected in the growing number of 
registered businesses. So far, electronic registration remains only available for single-
member limited liability companies. This does not seem to represent a major obstacle given 
the increasing number of newly registered businesses. The reduction of a significant number 
of local taxes and fees, and the availability of some 40 support programmes in addition to the 
pandemic support measures helped to promote entrepreneurship. Thus, at the end of 2021, the 
number of business increased by 8.7% to 65,621; this compares to 60,361 in 2019 before the 
COVID-19 crisis. Also in December 2021, the government adopted a program to attract 
digital nomads, offering tax reliefs on personal income to foreign companies’ teleworkers.  
The out of court’s bailiff system remains the key pillar for enforcement of debt claims, 
but needs to be reinforced. In 2021, the number of debt claim cases increased by 15.6% y-
o-y. However, almost two thirds of cases received during 2021 are still pending, stressing the 
need to reinforce the debt collection system. The Commercial Court presents a higher rate of 
successful case handling, receiving 1,065 cases in 2021 and solving 95.4% the same year, 
with an average time for resolution of bankruptcy proceedings of 221 days compared to 234 
days a year before. Overall, Montenegro’s bankruptcy system is relatively well functioning, 
but some extreme cases are negatively affecting the average proceeding time. 
Government efforts to reduce informality need to continue and require more focus in 
the coming years. The abolition of health contributions in 2022 reduced some of the 
disincentives for employers to formalise employment. However, the government still needs to 
adopt a comprehensive action plan (pending the completion of a survey on informality among 
enterprises and households) for fighting the informal economy, including the strengthening of 
enforcement capacities, and in particular, tax and labour inspections. 
State influence on product markets 
State influence on the economy remains limited, despite some recent measures aimed to 
contain price increases. The ministry of economic development proposed in December 2021 
the free formation of prices of white bread as of January 2022. As a result, bread price surged 
by 30% as of 10 January 2022. In an effort to contain the increase in the cost of living, the 
Parliament approved on 11 May 2022 a special law allowing the government to set temporary 
price caps on key essential products. Following this, the government reduced in June 2022 
the amount of excise duty for the sale of unleaded fuel and gas -oils by 50% and limited the 
price margins of flour, sugar, table salt and cooking oil by up to 5% on the wholesale price of 
the products and by 7% the retail price. The government has also approved additional EUR 1 
million to be used, amongst others, for market interventions to ensure price stability of 
agricultural commodities. Overall, the allocated amount for subsidies in the general 
government budget has remained limited, averaging 0.8% of GDP annually since 2017. The 
Agency for Protection of Competition (APC) increased the number of competition and state 
aid investigations and established a general register of state aid to ensure better transparency 
and monitoring of public aid. Thus far, the major beneficiary of state aid has been 
Montenegro Airlines. The company has been under bankruptcy procedures since mid-2021. 
In December 2021, the parliament adopted a law annulling the decision from 2019 that 
granted Montenegro Airlines EUR 155 million over a 6-year period. However, a plan to 
recover the funds already disbursed still needs to be adopted. 
Privatisation and restructuring 
The privatisation process is quite advanced considering the limited number of state-
owned enterprises (SOEs); however, important challenges remain in terms of their 
governance and profitability. In July 2022, the government decided to liquidate the public 


===== PAGE 68 =====
 
67 
 
company ‘Montenegro Works’ established less than one year earlier by the previous 
administration. The goal of this company was to relaunch the privatisation agenda, define an 
optimal portfolio of state ownership after transforming SOEs’ management structures, 
eliminate political patronage and improve financial performance to reduce fiscal risks (a 
challenging task considering that financial statements of 53% of SOEs audited are not aligned 
with international financial reporting standards and several companies are running losses). 
The government intends instead to develop a system to monitor public companies’ business 
operations and the related fiscal risks. This new system would be supported by a dedicated 
department at the Ministry of Finance as well as the independent analysis of a fiscal council, 
yet to be established. These plans do not seem to address, however, the fundamental issues of 
optimising state ownership portfolio and improving overall SOEs governance and fall short 
on Montenegro’s Economic Reform Programme commitments. 
Meanwhile, the government increased its founding capital as shareholder of the new national 
airline company “To Montenegro”. However, the sustainability of this company is yet to be 
ensured, as debt started soon to accumulate since its first year of operation. The second stage 
of the tender procedure for a 30-year concession of the two international airports (Podgorica 
and Tivat) remains on hold as the new government has not decided yet whether to cancel or 
continue the procedure. After establishing a commission to audit past sales contracts, the 
privatisation council has not held any sessions since July 2021. 
Functioning of the financial market 
Financial stability 
The banking sector proved to be resilient and the financial sector stability has overall 
been maintained.  The banking sector further consolidated after recording two mergers in 
2021, reducing the total number of banks in Montenegro from 13 to 11. Yet, the ownership 
structure of the banks' capital did not change significantly. At the end of 2021, bank's capital 
was predominately foreign with an 85% share, originating mainly from large banking groups 
from the EU in control of 79.9% of the banking market, while the share of domestic capital 
totalled 15%. The Central Bank of Montenegro (CBCG) concluded in September 2021 an 
asset quality review (AQR) for all domestic banks according to the ECB methodology. 
Results confirmed the stability and strong position of the domestic banking system at the start 
of the COVID-19 crisis. During the pandemic, the CBCG adopted ten packages of temporary 
measures aimed at preserving the liquidity and solvency of domestic banks. As a result, the 
balance sheets of domestic banks recorded significant growth, and the capital adequacy ratio 
totalled 18.5% at the end of 2021, well above the statutory minimum of 10%. The phasing-
out of fiscal support and targeted loan moratoria did not lead to a significant deterioration in 
the quality of the loan portfolio, but risks remain and should be closely monitored, in 
particular in the context of a worsening growth outlook and tightening financing conditions. 
The NPL ratio increased to 6.2% at the end of 2021 up from 5.5% the year before, to peak at 
6.9% in January 2022 and to start declining gradually afterwards, reaching 6.3% in June. 
Access to finance 
Credit activity has been growing continuously since 2019, supporting the corporate 
sector in particular. Total loan growth accelerated from 5.0% y-o-y in 2020, to 6.6% y-o-y 
in 2021 and further 6.8% y-o-y in June 2022. The rapid increase was led by lending to the 
corporate sector, while the increase in loans to households remained moderate and loans to 
the public sector decreased. The recovery of the economy has been reflected in a fast increase 
in banks’ deposits too, which went from a 2.6% y-o-y contraction in 2020 to a 12.8% y-o-y 
expansion in 2021, and a surge by 21.4% y-o-y in June 2022, again led by the corporate 


===== PAGE 69 =====
 
68 
 
sector. Although trending down, lending interest rates are still high presenting one of the 
major obstacles to access finance, in particular for small businesses. In March 2022, the 
government adopted a law to establish a national Credit Guarantee Fund. With the support 
from the EBRD, work commenced to establish a roadmap and overarching framework for the 
new institution. 
The size of the non-bank financial sector remains marginal. The stock market’s role in the 
local economy is very small in terms of market turnover (0.95% of GDP in 2021), while the 
assets of insurers represent around 2% of GDP. Microfinance is the most commonly used 
source of alternative finance, with assets accounting for some 1.6% of GDP in 2021. 
Functioning of the labour market 
The labour market continues to suffer 
from structural deficiencies. The outbreak 
of the COVID-19 in March 2020 was rapidly 
followed by a sharp decline in employment 
and a surge of unemployment due to the 
collapse of tourism. Despite several state-
support 
packages, 
employment 
kept 
contracting until June 2021. As a result, 
employment declined on average by 2.4% y-
o-y in 2021, after recording a 10.1% y-o-y 
plunge a year before. By contrast, the 
unemployment rate witnessed some relative improvement in 2021, falling to 16.9% compared 
to 18.4% a year earlier. However, the reason for this decrease in unemployment was a lower 
participation in the labour market, which fell from a peak of 66.2% in 2019 to 59.2% in 2021. 
The employment rate bounced back to 54.4% in the first quarter of 2022, up from 44.8% a 
year before, practically recovering pre-pandemic levels. The reduction of the unemployment 
rate was particularly pronounced for women, reaching 15.5% in 2022 Q1 compared to a 
much higher rate of 19.7% a year ago, as services –where a majority of women work– 
recovers faster than the industrial and construction sectors, where men are majority. As a 
result, the pace of reduction of men’s unemployment rate was significantly slower, declining 
to 18.3% in 2022 Q1 compared to a 19.5% rate a year earlier. Overall, the pandemic 
highlighted the structural deficiencies of Montenegro’s labour market. Youth and long-term 
unemployment remain high and there are considerable regional disparities (e.g. 5% 
unemployment rate in the coast, compared to substantially higher levels in the central and 
northern areas of 11.9% and 36.7%, respectively). Overall, the provision of active labour 
market policies is not effective in activating people on the labour market. Moreover, the 
country lacks a continuous monitoring mechanism of active labour market measures, which 
should be carried out by the Employment Agency of Montenegro. However, the reform of the 
currently ineffective institutional setup of the Agency has not been implemented. The 
effective application of the labour law has been hampered by poor implementation and 
malpractice. For instance, to avoid dismissal costs employers request new hires to sign 
resignation letters upon recruitment. Moreover, there has been no cases where a foreign 
investor has been successful in court in relation to the application of the labour law. Real 
wage growth was negative between 2017 and 2021, except for a deflationary period in 2020. 
Despite accelerating inflation, the government boosted households’ real disposable income in 
2022, after rising the minimum gross wage by 43% (which translates into an 80% increase in 
net terms), and reducing significantly the tax wedge on labour. As a result, the net average 
wage climbed to EUR 707 in April 2022, up from EUR 537 at the end of 2021.  


===== PAGE 70 =====
 
69 
 
2.3.2. The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the 
Union 
Montenegro has made some progress and is moderately prepared to cope with competitive 
pressure and market forces within the EU. The last two governments worked to improve 
innovation capacities and to set the basis for a green and digital transition in an effort to 
diversify Montenegro’s narrow production base. In particular, modern telecommunication 
and ambitious green energy projects are being deployed. However, infrastructure gaps 
persist, as the country administrative and financial capacities to identify, prioritise and to 
implement major public investments remain limited, hampering the use of EU support. The 
education system still faces numerous challenges with a chronic shortage of science, 
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) graduates. In addition, the low value -
added of domestic products, the small size of local companies and their low level of 
participation in exports represent obstacles for increasing the productivity and 
competitiveness of local firms. 
As some of the 2021 recommendations have not been fully implemented, in the coming year 
Montenegro should in particular: 
→ continue implementing digital services for micro, small and medium enterprises and 
prioritise the development and implementation of interactive e-government platform for 
transactional electronic services; 
→ improve dual VET and tertiary education programmes in close cooperation with business 
associations; 
→ Implement the public investment management assessment (PIMA) recommendations, 
prioritising key public infrastructure works without endangering public finances. 
Education and innovation 
Montenegro’s education system faces numerous challenges. Due to the COVID-19 
pandemic, little progress has been made in advancing reforms to improve the quality of 
education on the basis of agreed action plans. Recent tests had confirmed that both the quality 
and relevance of the education system, including the lack of practical experience of graduates 
from vocational and higher education, remain key challenges. The occupational mismatch 
appears particularly high for tertiary education graduates, with a chronic shortage of medical 
and STEM graduates, putting at risk Montenegro’s smart specialisation strategy. The high 
transition rate from vocational education to some higher education programmes without 
occupational demand in Montenegro’s labour market aggravates youth unemployment. The 
recent strategy for digitalization of the education system (2022-2027) aims to make internet 
available in all schools. 
Montenegro increased the budget allocation for research and development but it still 
remains modest, totalling 0.15% of GDP in 2022, compared to the EU average of 2.3%. 
In 2021, only 18% of Montenegrin firms introduced a new product or service compared to a 
37% average in the Western Balkans. Moreover, 80% of local firms declare that that they do 
not invest in R&D. To improve this situation, the government established the Innovation 
Fund in September 2021 as a state-owned limited liability company. The main activity of the 
Fund is to provide financial resources for the development of innovative entrepreneurship and 
to encourage cooperation between the scientific and economic sectors. In April 2022, the 
Fund launched its first two calls for support schemes for entrepreneurs. After some initial 
delays, the construction of a large Science and Technology Park in Podgorica is in progress. 
Works also continues on the development of an information and communication technology 


===== PAGE 71 =====
 
70 
 
cluster to support the implementation of the smart specialisation strategy. The local IT 
industry is relatively small but it has been developing fast in the last three years. In March 
2022, the Ministry of Economic Development and the University of Montenegro decided to 
establish a National Technology Transfer Office within the Science and Technology Park in 
Podgorica. 
Physical capital and quality of infrastructure 
Efforts are ongoing to support the digital and green transition but infrastructure gaps 
remain. In December 2021, the Government adopted the Strategy for the Digital 
Transformation of Montenegro (2022-2026), which takes a comprehensive, horizontal 
approach and contains objectives related to the development of digital infrastructure and 
connectivity. The telecommunications sector keeps developing fast. In December 2021, the 
first three 5G frequency licences were granted and one operator already launched commercial 
5G mobile network services. Access to green finance has been strengthened with the 
establishment of the Eco Fund (2020), providing financial support for the development of 
projects in the fields of preservation, sustainable use, protection and improvement of the 
environment, energy efficiency, and use of renewable sources. Reconstruction of the Pljevlja 
thermal power plant to reduce its environmental impact was launched in April 2022. In order 
to advance gradually with the transition away from coal, Montenegro’s national utility 
company is preparing a study for the construction of gas-fired power plants. The government 
withdrew concessions for several smaller hydropower plants, but continues with plans for 
larger ones, while the private sector advances with plans for constructing new wind and solar 
capacities. The first section of the Bar-Boljare highway was opened to traffic in July 2022, 
with a three-year delay. The EU-financed feasibility study and cost-benefit analysis for the 
entire Bar-Boljare highway, including on recommended construction standards and means of 
financing for the remaining sections, is underway and it should be completed in 2022. 
Meanwhile, works on the Adriatic-Ionian expressway could not start yet as preparation of the 
Budva bypass section preliminary design work was not mature enough. The upgrade of the 
railway network continued but with delays in some sections. 
Sectoral and enterprise structure 
The structure of the economy has remained broadly unchanged, but adjustments are 
taking place within sectors. Overall, small and medium size companies remain the 
backbone of Montenegro’s economy, accounting for some 94% of total firms. The 
distribution of employment remained stable, with the services sector absorbing roughly three 
quarters of total employment in 2021, while industry and construction (16.9%) as well as 
agriculture (6.4%) accounted for a much lower shares. Within services, tourism is 
predominant, contributing a quarter of Montenegro’s GDP. The sector was severely hit by the 
COVID-19 crisis but recovered better than expected in 2021 and 2022. Visitors from Russia 
and Ukraine used to make up a significant share of foreign tourists. In order to limit the 
negative impact of the war against Ukraine, the sector has shifted its focus to other markets. 
The metallurgical sector recorded a major adjustment following the surge in energy prices 
resulting in the stoppage of the aluminium smelter as well as of the Niksic’s ironworks due to 
unsustainable production costs. The halt in production of the metal producers provided a 
major opportunity for the energy sector, which exported at substantially higher prices9 the 
electricity surplus not consumed by the industry. The energy sector is currently engaged into 
its green transition, developing a number of renewable generation plants. 
                                                            
9 Large industrial consumers enjoyed significant rebates in energy prices. 


===== PAGE 72 =====
 
71 
 
Economic integration with the EU and price competitiveness 
The economic recovery boosted external trade and brought the trade openness ratio 
back to its pre-pandemic level. During 2021, Montenegro’s foreign trade expanded by 
19.1% y-o-y, while bilateral trade with the EU followed the same trend, growing 12% over 
the year. Overall, the total exchange of goods and services recovered to pre-pandemic levels, 
totalling 105.8% of GPD in 2021, after having plunged to 86.3% in 2020 as a consequence of 
the recession induced by the COVID-19 crisis. The EU remains Montenegro’s main foreign 
partner, accounting for 31.1% of total exports and 45.7% of total imports of goods. CEFTA 
countries also remain an important market, accounting for 43.2% of Montenegro’s total 
exports and 28.5% of total imports of goods. The EU also remains the main source of FDI 
inflows for Montenegro, registering 36.4% of total FDI inflows in 2021, compared to 27.0% 
a year before. The low processing level of domestic products and the very small size of local 
businesses represent two key challenges for boosting Montenegro’s export performance. To 
remedy this, the government’s micro- and small-sized enterprises strategy supports 
establishment of vertical clusters, especially in agriculture and tourism. 
 
2.4. PUBLIC PROCUREMENT, STATISTICS, FINANCIAL CONTROL  
Chapter 5: Public procurement  
EU rules ensure that public sector procurement of goods, services and works in any Member 
State is transparent and open to all EU companies on the basis of non-discrimination and 
equal treatment. EU rules ensure that public sector procurement of goods, services and 
works in any Member State is transparent and open to all EU companies on the basis of non-
discrimination and equal treatment.  
Montenegro is moderately prepared/has a good level of preparation on public 
procurement. Good progress was achieved in 2021, with full implementation of the 
electronic procurement system and further improvement in the functioning of the remedy 
system. Last year’s recommendation on e-procurement was met. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should: 
→ further improve the functionality of the e-procurement system and its interoperability 
with state administration registers;  
→ fully respect the EU public procurement rules in all relevant cases, such as when 
awarding the concession to operate Airports of Montenegro. 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
The legal framework on public procurement is well aligned with the EU acquis. The 
government adopted a new 2021-2025 strategy for improving public procurement and public-


===== PAGE 73 =====
 
72 
 
private partnership policies in October 2021. An accompanying action plan for 2022 was 
adopted at the same time. 
The electronic public procurement system became fully operational in 2021. By June 2022, 
all 662 contracting authorities and 3 687 economic operators were registered in the system. 
The implementation of e-procurement has the potential to significantly reduce the risks of 
corruption and breaches of competition rules, limiting the number of appeals. Further 
functionalities of the e-procurement system should be implemented in the course of 2022, 
including connections to the electronic registers of the Ministry of Justice and the Revenue 
and Customs Administration. These improvements will be instrumental for eligibility checks 
on the economic entities that participate in public procurement procedures and should further 
increase the transparency and fairness of the procurement system in Montenegro. 
The tender for the concession to operate Airports of Montenegro, suspended in 2020, has 
not been reactived yet. Full compliance of this and any other relevant procedure with the EU 
rules and standards of fair and transparent public procurement, providing value for money, 
competition and strong safeguards against corruption, would be essential for Montenegro in 
line with the requirements of this negotiating chapter. 
Implementation and enforcement capacity  
Montenegro’s public procurement market corresponded to 4.47% of GDP in 2021 and the 
value of all public procurement procedures amounted to some EUR 220 million. This was 
much below the values achieved in 2020 and caused by the very late adoption of 2021 state 
budget, major organisational changes in the public administration and COVID-19 crisis.  
On the monitoring of contract award and implementation, the Public Procurement 
Inspectorate executed 297 controls, the number increasing by 18 % in comparison to 2020. 
Most controls related to contract conclusion and execution phases. 
A regulatory and institutional framework is in place on integrity and conflict of interest in 
public procurement. 
The capacity to manage public procurement processes continued to improve, to a large 
degree thanks to the introduction of e-procurement. Nonetheless, the high number of 
contracting authorities remains an obstacle to the overall efficiency of the procurement 
system. The capacity of smaller municipalities to conduct larger and more complex public 
procurement procedures, including under EU-financed projects, remains very limited. The 
Directorate for Public Procurement Policy in the Ministry of Finance systematically organises 
trainings on the legal framework in public procurement and examinations for candidates for 
procurement officer positions. It also prepares and publishes technical instructions and expert 
guidance on the procurement rules. 
Efficient remedy system 
The legislation on the right to appeal is broadly in line with the EU acquis. Cases are 
handled by the Commission for Protection of Rights in Public Procurement Procedures.  
The Commission received 162 complaints in the period 15 June 2021-15 June 2022, a 
decrease of 33% in comparison to the previous period. The Commission also acted on 
20 judgements received from the Administrative Court of Montenegro, which represent cases 
returned for reconsideration. There were no significant delays in the treatment and resolution 
of the complaints. 


===== PAGE 74 =====
 
73 
 
The Supreme Court of Montenegro conducted five extraordinary reviews of the decisions 
taken by the Administrative Court on procurement procedures and in one case upheld a 
request for the review of the decision. 
Chapter 18: Statistics 
EU rules require that Member States are able to produce good quality statistics in line with 
the principles of the European statistics Code of Practice and based on professional 
independence, impartiality, reliability, transparency, and confidentiality. Common rules are 
provided for the methodology, production and dissemination of statistical information. 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of statistics. Limited progress was made 
on last year’s recommendations. Work continued on harmonising the statistical 
methodology with EU standards and increasing transmission of data to Eurostat. However, 
pending issues remain with regard to insufficient financial and human resources of the 
Statistical office of Montenegro (Monstat) and its lack of expertise in some areas; 
systematic cooperation and coordination of tasks between the Ministry of Finance, the 
Central Bank of Montenegro and Monstat; transmission of some fundamental datasets such 
as government finance statistics, as well as financial accounts and excessive deficit 
procedure tables to Eurostat. Thus, the 2021 report recommendations remain valid.  
In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ considerably strengthen the human and financial resources of Monstat, so that it can 
fully fulfil its responsibilities and retain expert staff;  
→ make significant progress in aligning with the European System of Accounts (ESA) 
2010, including providing government finance statistical data and all available 
excessive deficit procedure data; 
→ carry out the national population and housing census in line with EU requirements and 
recommendations and allocate sufficient resources for the exercise. 
The legal framework for statistical infrastructure is broadly in line with the European 
Statistics Code of Practice. Monstat is the main producer and overall coordinator of statistics. 
The current number of employees in Monstat remains slightly above 50% of the number of 
posts foreseen in the organisation chart. While a new Director was appointed in March 2022, 
the new building for the Statistical office has still not been provided. The Statistical Office 
accomplished the automation of three statistical releases (consumer price index, arrivals, 
overnight stays of tourists in collective accommodation and average wages) with monthly 
data collection and its publication (in Montenegrin and English).  
During 2021, the Statistical Office worked on improving statistical products and processes 
by introducing a self-assessment system of the statistical production process, increasing the 
number of quality reports for users on the official website of Monstat. In May 2022, Monstat 
launched a User Satisfaction Survey, the previous one dating back to 2017.  
On classifications and registers, there is high compliance in terms of implementation of the 
current versions of the NACE (Nomenclature of Economic Activities), CPA (Classification 
of products by activity), ISCO (International standard classification of occupations) and 
ISCED (International standard classification of education) classifications.  Montenegro is 
medium compliant on business registers, and it needs to improve the quality, especially 
regarding completeness of mandatory variables. 
In the area of macroeconomic statistics, and specifically national accounts statistics, 
Monstat published a number of data sets related to the gross national income (GNI) and the 


===== PAGE 75 =====
 
74 
 
gross domestic product (GDP) in accordance with ESA 2010. In order to improve Consumer 
Price Index / Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices, a new software application for 
calculation was created, which automatised the data processing and resolved inconsistencies 
in the index aggregation. The required sets of monthly international trade in goods data are 
regularly submitted to Eurostat according to the new data structure. In the field of trade in 
services, steps were taken in estimating the Financial Intermediation Services Indirectly 
Measured (FISIM) statistics: the data was published and transmitted to Eurostat. Monstat 
makes efforts to comply with ESA 2010 methodology filling out more variables within the 
tables for time series 2006-2020, but further efforts are needed in that regard (e.g. calculation 
of GDP by income approach, and introducing non-financial sector accounts).  
Government finance statistics are not sent to Eurostat. As regards excessive deficit 
procedure data, tables are still sent mostly empty. The methodological background, legal and 
institutional framework and adequate human resources are needed. In the area of monetary 
and financial statistics, the Central Bank of Montenegro (CBM) continued to report regularly 
to Eurostat and transmitted quarterly balance of payments (BoP) data for 2021, as well as 
preliminary annual data for 2020 and revised data for 2019 in the field of foreign direct 
investment.  Montenegro is encouraged to start sending monthly BoP data to Eurostat and to 
further improve the geographical breakdown of BoP and IIP (international investment 
position) data. 
In the area of business statistics, the harmonisation of short-term indicators with 
international standards of all domain statistics (industry, construction, retail trade and 
services) continued. This data is calendar and seasonally adjusted and forwarded to Eurostat 
in the required format.  
In the area of social statistics, the Law on the census of population, households and 
dwellings still needs to be adopted by the Parliament. The timeline of the census is still to be 
specified. By December 2021, the data collection fieldwork for a survey on gender-based 
violence was completed, and data for a survey on income and living conditions for 2020 was 
sent to Eurostat. The 2021 survey was conducted via a new method of Computer Assisted 
Personal Interviewing (CAPI) in April-May 2022. Monstat started conducting a regular 
survey on Innovative activities of companies for the period 2018-2020 (data collected in the 
second half of 2021). 
In the area of agriculture statistics, the preparation of the draft Law on the agricultural 
census is ongoing. Meanwhile, the implementation of the CAPI method for annual surveys in 
crop and livestock production was expanded to eleven municipalities. Preliminary data on 
pesticide sale and organic production for 2020 was submitted to Eurostat in June and 
December 2021, respectively.  
In the area of environmental statistics, while Montenegro is overall highly compliant in 
waste statistics, some actions are needed to provide final and not provisional data to Eurostat 
and to capture information on secondary waste.  Environmental accounts are still not in 
compliance with the EU requirements. 
Annual energy statistics are produced and fully harmonised with European legislation 
although they are delivered one month after the deadline. SHARES statistics (renewable 
energy sources) for Montenegro are available on the basis of energy balance data that are 
regularly transmitted to Eurostat. Energy price statistics are fully compliant with the relevant 
EU acquis. However, monthly reporting, as well as data concerning final energy consumption 
of households were not delivered. Montenegro is medium compliant in energy statistics.  
Chapter 32: Financial control 


===== PAGE 76 =====
 
75 
 
The EU promotes the reform of national governance systems to enhance managerial 
accountability, sound financial management of income and expenditure and external audit of 
public funds. The financial control rules further protect the EU’s financial interests against 
fraud in the management of EU funds and the euro against counterfeiting. 
Montenegro is moderately prepared on financial control. Overall, limited progress was 
made on the implementation of last year’s recommendations, in particular on completing 
the strategic framework for public internal financial control and the application of 
managerial accountability in public administration. The new public administration strategy 
includes actions to improve good governance and control systems. Quality assurance and 
risk management have improved, thanks to continuous training. The State Audit Institution 
is improving its capacities to follow up audit recommendations and continues to work for a 
more open and transparent communication with the Parliament. On the other hand, efforts 
are needed to further strengthen the internal control and internal audit practices in public 
bodies and in state-owned companies, focusing on performance rather than on compliance. 
Last year’s recommendations remain valid: 
→ operationalise the centralised budget inspection function in the Ministry of Finance; 
→ steer and strengthen the application of managerial accountability in public 
administration; 
→ further align with the EU acquis on the fight against fraud to the Union's financial 
interests and further strengthen the coordination capacity of the National Anti-fraud 
Coordination Service.   
Public internal financial control (PIFC) 
Montenegro’s strategic framework for PIFC is now partly in place. The new 2022-2026 
public administration reform (PAR) strategy, adopted in December 2021, sets the 
improvement of managerial accountability as a key objective. However, the adoption of the 
new public finance management (PFM) reform programme is required to complete the 
strategic framework.  The government adopts annual reports on the implementation of the 
PAR and PFM strategies, as well as annual consolidated reports on governance and internal 
control in the public sector (last adopted in July 2022).  
The legislative and operational framework for internal control and internal audit is in 
place, covering also local government entities and state-owned enterprises. Additionally, in 
August 2021, the government adopted the Decree on the establishment of internal audit in the 
public sector, with the aim to harmonise the internal audit system with the Decree on the 
organisation and manner of work of the state administration. Despite the fact that the legal 
framework allows delegation of authority in the field of financial management and internal 
control in the public sector, this is not broadly applied in practice.  
The legal and operational framework for financial management is largely in place and is in 
line with international standards. Further efforts are necessary to align programme-based 
budgeting and performance reporting with managerial accountability, as well as to upgrade 
risk management from operational to strategic level. A centralised budget inspection function 
in the Ministry of Finance still needs to be made operational.  
Internal audit rules, standards and practices are in line with international standards. Full 
budget coverage is ensured, and the internal unit function is organised on a decentralised 
basis. 24 budget users at central government level have established a separate internal audit 
unit, with 59 internal auditors appointed. All 15 municipalities obliged to establish internal 


===== PAGE 77 =====
 
76 
 
audit units have done so, with 35 auditors appointed. Adequate staffing of the internal audit 
units at both central and local level needs to be addressed. So far, 79 of total 90 appointed 
auditors were certified internal auditors, while others are in the process to be certified. The 
existing internal audit training and certification system ensures a long-term professional 
development programme for certified internal auditors, recently focused on risk management 
and quality assurance. However, follow-up of the recommendations requires further 
strengthening.   
The Central Harmonisation Unit (CHU) is responsible for developing and disseminating 
methodological guidance on PIFC, as well as for monitoring and reporting on implementation 
of internal financial control. Moreover, the CHU ensures quality review of financial 
management, internal control and internal audit activities. Its annual reports contain 
recommendations on how to improve the effectiveness of the internal control systems in the 
public sector. 
External audit 
The Constitution of Montenegro and the existing legal framework ensure the functional, 
operational and financial independence of the State Audit Institution (SAI), in line with the 
standards of the International Organisation of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI). SAI 
has further improved its institutional capacity in terms of auditing staff. Most of its auditors 
are certified and have access to internal and international training, including on quality 
control, ethics and integrity, gender equality and gender budgeting. One of the five positions 
as member of its Senate (the five people in the highest position who decide by majority), 
however, remains vacant, blocking all decisions as a consequence.  
On quality of audit work, SAI adopts and implements its annual audit plan based on risk 
assessment and on clearly defined criteria. Since June 2021, it carried out 35 audits. 
In December 2021, SAI, as a member of the European Organisation of Supreme Audit 
Institutions (EUROSAI), became a member of the EUROSAI working group for 
environmental audit. In March 2022, SAI also became a member of the INTOSAI working 
group for information system audit. 
As for the impact of its audit work, SAI improved its capacities to follow up audit 
recommendations, in line with the updated guidelines for developing, monitoring and control 
of audit recommendations. SAI submits annually a report on performed audits and activities 
to the Parliament, which includes an audit report on the government’s final statement of 
accounts and the excerpts of individual audit reports. The government is obliged to respect 
and implement all SAI recommendations related to the final statement of accounts and 
individual audits and report to the Parliament on a quarterly basis. However, the Parliament 
still does not ensure a structured follow-up of SAI recommendations. All SAI reports are 
publicly accessible. 
With regard to the Audit Authority, the institution increased its oversight capacity both in 
terms of human resources and number of performed audits (25 according to the latest report), 
with improvements on management, accountability and transparency in the use of EU funds. 
The head position, however, remains vacant, which has an impact on the operational 
capacities of this institution. 
Protection of the EU’s financial interests 
With regard to EU acquis alignment, amendments to the Criminal Code of Montenegro are 
under preparation, with the aim to further align the national legislation with the EU Directive 
on the fight against fraud to the Union's financial interests by means of criminal law. The 


===== PAGE 78 =====
 
77 
 
national Anti-Fraud Coordination Service (AFCOS) is improving its capacities to fight 
irregularities and fraud and to coordinate the AFCOS network for the protection of the EU 
financial interests. A new national anti-fraud strategy 2022-2025 is under preparation.    
Cooperation and exchange of information with the European Commission (OLAF) 
during investigations continued. Six cases of irregularities were reported in 2021 and five in 
2022. In May 2022, AFCOS supported OLAF during an on-the-spot control.  However, 
Montenegro should increase its efforts in further developing a track record on cooperation in 
investigations and reporting of irregularities.  
Protection of the Euro against counterfeiting 
Montenegro’s legislation on protection of Euro against counterfeiting is partially in place. 
The country has the necessary structures for technical analysis and classification of 
counterfeit money, including euro banknotes and coins.  
As of November 2021, the Council of the Central Bank of Montenegro (CBCG) amended 
the Decision on authenticity and fitness checking and recirculation of euro banknotes and 
coins. The amended decision is fully harmonised with the relevant decision of the European 
Central Bank (ECB).  
Activities to protect the euro against counterfeiting in line with harmonised EU and ECB 
regulations and standards continued. The CBCG monitored the cash handlers' work standards 
and tested cash handling devices. It also continued cooperation and exchange of information 
with the Police Directorate and the Higher Prosecutor's Office. Under the signed agreements, 
CBCG continued cooperating and exchanging information with the ECB, the European 
Commission and other international institutions on protecting the euro against counterfeiting. 
3. GOOD NEIGHBOURLY RELATIONS AND REGIONAL COOPERATION 
Good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation form an essential part of Montenegro’s 
European integration process and contribute to stability, reconciliation and a climate 
conducive to addressing open bilateral issues and the legacies of the past.  
Montenegro maintained its engagement in a number of regional initiatives, such as the 
Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA), Energy Community, Transport 
Community, the South-East European Cooperation Process (SEECP) and the Regional 
Cooperation Council. Montenegro also actively participates in initiatives such as the Central 
European Initiative (CEI) and the Centre for Security Cooperation (RACVIAC).  
Following the May 2022 Foreign Affairs Council, EU foreign ministers held, for the first 
time, an informal exchange of views with Western Balkans counterparts. The EU and 
Western Balkans Leaders Meeting on 23 June 2022 reaffirmed the EU perspective of the 
partners in the region and gave impulse to intensify the cooperation and integration agenda. 
Particular focus was placed on the integration of the Western Balkans into EU measures to 
reduce the negative impact of the Russian aggression on Ukraine in terms of food and energy 
supplies and independence, as well as to support capacity building for cyber security and the 
social agenda, notably involving youth in the economy. The meeting was also an opportunity 
to discuss closer political cooperation, including foreign policy alignment of the Western 
Balkans with EU positions and restrictive measures. 
At the EU-Western Balkans summit in Brdo pri Kranju in October 2021, the six Western 
Balkans leaders reaffirmed their commitment to inclusive regional cooperation, strengthening 
good neighbourly relations and investing more decisive efforts in establishing the Common 
Regional Market. The summit announced a range of concrete deliverables benefiting the 
Western Balkans, including the first set of actions under the Economic and Investment Plan; 


===== PAGE 79 =====
 
78 
 
the pledge to boost COVID-19 vaccination rates; the path towards lower roaming costs; an 
innovation agenda for the Western Balkans; green lanes to reduce border waiting times and 
Transport Community action plans for smart transport and sustainable connectivity. 
The  Common Regional Market, as agreed by the leaders of the Western Balkans at the 
2020 Berlin process summit in Sofia, is critical in increasing the attractiveness and 
competitiveness of the region. It will help Montenegro to speed up the recovery  from the 
aftermath of the pandemic, notably to attract investors looking for diversification of supply 
and shorter value chains and to maximise the benefits of the infrastructure investments under 
the Economic and Investment Plan. A number of important decisions to facilitate the 
movement of workers remain blocked. It is important that all parties play a constructive role 
in building the Common Regional Market and deliver on their joint commitments set out in 
the Common Regional Market’s  action plan. 
In October 2021, Montenegro along with other Western Balkan partners endorsed the action 
plan for the Green Agenda for the Western Balkans, which mirrors the European Green 
Deal10 in a proportionate and adapted manner in the Western Balkans. It provides for joint 
actions, which will contribute to the sustainable socio-economic development and the green 
recovery of the entire region in the post-pandemic period. Montenegro should implement this 
joint regional vision, with high level of ambition, putting sustainable development, resource 
efficiency, nature protection and climate action at the centre of all economic activities. 
Albania, North Macedonia and Serbia seek to deepen regional co-operation in a number of 
areas, notably economic integration through the Open Balkan Initiative (OBI), implementing 
some elements of the Common Regional Market on which no formal agreement has been 
reached yet. Montenegro has not joined. OBI. Four OBI summits have been held, 
Montenegro participated in the June and September summits as an observer.  
Montenegro has continued to closely cooperate with Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and 
Serbia under the Sarajevo Declaration Process, which aims to find sustainable solutions  for 
refugees and displaced persons as a result of the armed conflicts in ex-Yugoslavia during the 
1990s. Within the framework of the Regional Housing Programme (RHP), 417 housing 
units have been built, purchased or reconstructed by end of June 2022 in Montenegro, able to 
accommodate 1 250 persons. Significant challenges remain with regard to the economic and 
social integration and wellbeing for many families, required to ensure sustainability of return.  
The unresolved fate of missing persons who disappeared in relation to the conflicts of the 
1990s remains a key issue to be solved in the Western Balkans. Montenegro continued to 
actively participate in the Regional Missing Persons Group. There are still 51persons missing 
by June 2022 as a result of the conflict.  
Montenegro generally maintains good bilateral relations with other enlargement countries 
in the region and with neighbouring EU Member States, relations were marked by continued 
cooperation and several high level visits.  
Relations with Albania remained good, with occasional high-level bilateral visits. Maritime 
delimitation between the two countries remains pending.  
Relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina remained good. The agreed border demarcation is 
yet to be physically marked. Three joint border crossing points remain to be set up.  
Relations with Kosovo remained good. Montenegro and Kosovo signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding on mutual recognition of insurance documents in cross-border traffic.  
                                                            
10 COM(2019) 640 final. 


===== PAGE 80 =====
 
79 
 
Relations with North Macedonia remained good. President of North Macedonia visited 
Montenegro in April 2022.  
Relations with Serbia remain challenging but both sides signal more willingness to reset the 
relations and work toward addressing open issues. Ad hoc political spats between the two 
leaderships took place. The Prime Miniter of Montenegro visited Belgrade in November 
2021, June 2022 and September 2022.  
Relations with Türkiye remained stable. Türkiye’s President visited the country in August 
2021. The Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister of Health visited Türkiye in October 
2021.  
Relations with Croatia remained good overall. The Prime Minister held a bilateral meeting 
with his Croatian counterpart on the margins of the CEI Summit in Budva in November 2021. 
President of Montenegro visited Croatia in December 2021. There have been no 
developments regarding the pending border demarcation between Montenegro and Croatia.  
Relations with Italy remained good. Minister for Foreign Affairs visited Italy in December 
2021 and had bilateral meetings with the Italian Senate and the Chamber of Communes. 
4. 
ABILITY TO ASSUME THE OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP  
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET  
This cluster covers chapters 1-free movement of goods, 2-freedom of movement for workers, 
3-right of establishment and freedom to provide services, 4-free movement of capital, 5-
company law, 7-intellectual property law, 8-competition policy, 9-financial services, and 28-
consumer and health protection. All nine chapters are open, with closing benchmarks that 
remain to be fulfilled in each chapter. This cluster is key for Montenegro’s preparations for 
the requirements of the EU’s internal market and is of high relevance for early integration 
and the development of the Common Regional Market. 
Progress was achieved in different areas e.g. on market surveillance, accreditation and 
standardisation; stepping up the Employment agency’s capacity on the European network of 
employment services; continued alignment with the Services Directive; legislation on 
accounting; acquis alignment on intellectual property rights. State aid transparency and 
ordering recovery of unlawful State aid; the stability of the banking sector of Montenegro 
also advanced, as well as legislative alignment on consumer protection and adoption of 
implementation legislation on health protection. 
In the coming period, Montenegro is invited to focus on the following areas: ensure sufficient 
resources to the market surveillance, standardization and accreditation bodies; strengthening 
acquis implementation for the coordination of social security systems; finalise to establish a 
fully operational Point of Single Contact for regulated professions; align with the acquis on 
capital movements and payments, including on the acquisition of property rights and monitor 
the phasing out of the investors' citizenship scheme; align with the Transparency Directive; 
adopt the new national intellectual property strategy; improve the track record in the area of 
competition and State aid; complete alignment of national legislation with the EU consumer 
protection and health protection acquis, including on substances of human origin; complete 
legislative alignment with and implementation of the Capital Requirements Directive and the 
Capital Requirements Regulation.  
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods  


===== PAGE 81 =====
 
80 
 
The free movement of goods ensures that many products can be traded freely across the EU 
based on common rules and procedures. Where products are governed by national rules, the 
principle of the free movement of goods prevents these creating unjustified barriers to trade. 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of free movement of goods. Overall, 
some progress was made, with further alignment with the EU acquis and by taking steps 
towards the national standardisation body’s full membership of the European Committee 
for Standardisation (CEN) and the European Committee for Electrotechnical 
Standardisation (CENELEC). Other recommendations from last year remain largely valid 
though, and human resources and funding in the sector still remain inadequate. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ ensure that sufficient human and financial resources are allocated to its market 
surveillance, standardisation and accreditation bodies; 
→ continue to align with the EU acquis, as envisaged in the relevant action plan under this 
chapter, notably horizontal legislation on technical requirements, conformity 
assessment and market surveillance of products;  
→ ensure the implementation and enforcement of the Montenegrin legislation on 
chemicals management that is aligned with the EU acquis. 
General principles 
Montenegro continued to progress on its alignment with the EU acquis on the free 
movement of goods, as laid down in the relevant national action plan. In particular, the Law 
on standardisation and the Law on ratification of the convention on the establishment of an 
international organisation for legal metrology were adopted in December 2021. Market 
surveillance, standardisation and accreditation bodies still do not have adequate human and 
financial resources to implement the EU acquis.  
Non-harmonised areas  
Montenegro continued to implement its action plan for compliance with Articles 34-36 of the 
Treaty for the European Union (TFEU) on prohibition of quantitative restrictions.  
Harmonised area: quality infrastructure 
As concerns standardisation, the Institute for Standardisation of Montenegro (ISME) 
published 2 654 Montenegrin standards aligned with the EU standards. By the first quarter of 
2022, CEN/CENELEC evaluated the ISME adoption rate at almost 88 % of European 
standards at the national level (86.17 % CEN standards and 92.01 % CENELEC standards). 
ISME became a full member of the International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO) in 
July 2021. Moreover, ISME submitted its application for full membership of 
CEN/CENELEC in December 2021, and CEN/CENELEC peer assessment is ongoing. 
However, the human resources situation of ISME has yet to be addressed (only 65 % of 
systematised job positions are filled). 
On metrology, the main national legislation is aligned with relevant EU acquis, and three 
pieces of implementing legislation were adopted on certification criteria, technical and 
metrological conditions, and professional staff levels and procedures. During the reporting 
period, 45 conformity assessment bodies were accredited by the Accreditation Body of 
Montenegro (ATCG), including 28 testing laboratories, 2 calibration laboratories, 2 medical 
examination laboratories, 8 inspection bodies, 3 bodies for products certification and 3 bodies 
for the certification of management systems. In November 2021, the European Cooperation 
for Accreditation (EA) performed a pre-evaluation of ATCG, identifying five non-


===== PAGE 82 =====
 
81 
 
conformities, which were resolved by ATCG in April 2022. A full evaluation of ATCG prior 
to the signature of an EA Multilateral Agreement is foreseen to take place in November 2022. 
On market surveillance of products, 2 137 inspections were carried out (1 754 inspections 
in proactive and 383 inspections in reactive surveillance) as compared to 2 211 in the 
previous reporting period. A total of 931 types of dangerous and non-compliant products 
were identified (59 041 items). Administrative measures have been imposed accordingly, as 
appropriate. The Administration for Inspection Affairs should be further reinforced. 
Harmonised area: sectoral legislation 
Regarding ‘new and global approach’ product legislation, in order to ensure further 
alignment with the EU acquis, Montenegro amended implementing legislation in the 
construction sector (transitioning to Eurocodes), and in the areas of medical devices and 
personal protective equipment.  
Similarly, on ‘old approach product legislation’, implementing legislation on chemical 
classification (Globally Harmonised System of the UN), cosmetic products, transparency of 
measures regulating the prices of medicinal products and prohibited substances in cosmetic 
products was adopted, to improve the level of alignment to the relevant EU acquis. 
Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers  
Citizens of one Member State have the right to work in another Member State and must be 
given the same working and social conditions as other workers. 
Montenegro has some level of preparation in this area. Limited progress was achieved in 
the reporting period on social security systems and in particular on last year’s 
recommendation to step up the capacity of the Employment Agency. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ continue to work on strengthening structures to implement the EU acquis in the area and 
in particular as concerns the coordination of the social security systems. 
On 30 July 2021, the government re-established the Chapter 2 Working Group. Its 
composition includes relevant social and civil society partners. In September 2021, the 2021-
2025 strategy on migration and reintegration of returnees in Montenegro and its action plan 
for 2021-2022 were adopted. 
On access to the labour market, there were no legislative developments. The Law on 
foreigners governs entry, stay and work of foreign citizens. Specific provisions for EU 
nationals are included in the law on foreigners and will apply as of the date of accession. For 
2022, the government set the annual number of permits for temporary residence and work of 
foreigners to 20 454, almost identical to 2021. Procedures for handling foreigners’ requests 
for temporary residence and seasonal employment permits through Montenegro`s 
representations in countries of origin remain to be finalised. 
In preparation to join EURES (European network of employment services) upon accession, 
efforts have been stepped up to improve the current institutional set-up and administrative 
and technical capacities of the Employment Agency of Montenegro. This includes IT 
hardware and software specifications, enabling the future participation to EURES and 
preparing a twinning project on capacity strengthening, to start in the second half of 2022. 
On the coordination of the social security systems, the number of bilateral agreements in 
force remained at 25 without further developments. The bilateral agreement with Romania 
has yet to be signed. Amendments to those with Serbia and with Bosnia and Herzegovina 


===== PAGE 83 =====
 
82 
 
remain to be concluded. The Interdepartmental Working Group for the Coordination of 
Social Security Systems was set up in January 2022 with the aim to facilitate the cooperation 
in this area. 
The European Health Insurance Card is recognised under the law on compulsory health 
insurance but will be introduced after accession. The number of agreements with EU Member 
States on the use of the card remained at five (Austria, Germany, Luxembourg, Slovakia, 
Slovenia). There were no further developments in recruitment of the coordination staff in the 
regional units of the Health Insurance Fund. 
Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services  
EU natural and legal persons have the right to establish themselves in any Member State and 
to provide cross-border services. For certain regulated professions, there are rules on mutual 
recognition of qualifications. Postal services are gradually being opened up to competition. 
Montenegro remains moderately prepared in this area. Limited progress was made during 
the reporting period, on the establishment of a Point of Single Contact, further alignment 
with the Services Directive, and continuation of electronic registration as per last year’s 
recommendations. 
In the following period, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ establish a fully operational Point of Single Contact; 
→ continue inter-ministerial coordination and fully align with the EU Services Directive;  
→ complete alignment with the EU postal acquis, including the Regulation on cross-border 
parcel delivery services. 
On the right of establishment and freedom to provide cross -border services, alignment 
of the implementing legislation with the EU Services Directive continued, albeit at a slower 
pace. Establishment of the Point of Single Contact for services (PSC) is supported through an 
EU technical assistance project. Upgrading the administrative capacity in the Services 
Department of the Ministry of Economic Development should be a priority. Electronic 
company registration was further pursued (see also chapter 6 Company law). 
On postal services, the legislation is aligned with the EU Postal Services Directive. Postal 
services market remains fully open to competition. Montenegro should still ensure full 
alignment with the EU postal acquis, including with the Regulation on cross-border parcel 
delivery services. The number of postal operators increased by 4 to 30 operators. The 
implementation of the 2021-2022 action plan on the postal development strategy has 
progressed as planned. 
On the mutual recognition of professional qualifications, Montenegro has a satisfying level 
of alignment with the EU acquis. A follow up on foreseen measures set out in the national 
plan to develop qualifications for regulated professions is still needed to ensure continuous 
alignment. 
Chapter 4 - Free movement of capital  
In the EU, capital and investments must be able to move without restriction and there are 
common rules for cross-border payments. Banks and other economic operators apply certain 
rules to support the fight against money laundering and terrorist financing.  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in this area. Some progress was made on the 
strategic framework for the prevention of terrorism, money laundering and terrorism 
financing. The legal framework on payment systems was further aligned with the EU 


===== PAGE 84 =====
 
83 
 
acquis. Montenegro decided to extend the life of its investor citizenship scheme for an 
additional 12 months until December 2022, despite the previously announced decision to 
end the scheme in 2021, and despite the recommendations by the Commission to phase the 
scheme out as soon as possible.  
Last year’s recommendations remain largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro 
should: 
→ continue aligning with the EU acquis on capital movements and payments, including 
on the acquisition of property rights; 
→ strengthen the anti-money laundering supervision of the non-financial sector, 
particularly in high risk areas such as the games of chance, by amending the law on 
games of chance and the law on the prevention of money laundering and terrorism 
financing;  
→ phase out of the investors' citizenship scheme, while continuing to monitor it as long as 
it runs, to prevent risks related to money laundering. 
On capital movements and payments, since 2017 Montenegro has a regime of free 
movement of capital, no limitation on the transfer of property, and no foreign exchange or 
currency control. However, full alignment with the EU acquis has not been achieved. The 
adoption of a new insurance law remains pending. Montenegro has yet to implement its 
obligations under the Stabilisation and Association Agreement as regards amending the Law 
on ownership rights, removing preferential treatments and ensuring that EU citizens can buy 
real estate or farming land under the same conditions as Montenegro citizens. 
As regards the payment system, amendments to the Law on payment system, aimed at 
aligning the law with the Payment Services Directive 2, have yet to be adopted. The Law on 
comparability of fees related to consumer payment accounts, payment accounts switching and 
access payment accounts with basic features, and the Law on interchange fees and separate 
business rules concerning payment cards were adopted in December 2021. The drafting of 
implementing legislation is in process. 
Montenegro currently has three licensed payment institutions and 22 agents registered in 
payment institutions. In 2021, the Central Bank of Montenegro revoked from one electronic 
payment institution the authorisation for issuing e-money and for providing payment services. 
Seven inspections of operations of payment institutions were performed by the Central Bank 
to check the compliance in the area of payment operations. Misdemeanour proceedings were 
initiated against four banks.   
On anti-money laundering and terrorism financing, the government adopted in December 
2021 the strategy for the prevention and suppression of terrorism, money laundering and 
terrorism financing for 2022-2025. An implementing legislation to the Law on prevention 
and suppression of money laundering and terrorist financing was adopted on indicators for 
recognizing suspicious customers and transactions. The process of alignment of the legal 
framework on the prevention of money laundering and terrorism financing with the fifth EU 
Anti-Money Laundering Directive and with the recommendations of the Financial Action 
Task Force (FATF) is on-going. However, the Law on games of chance has yet to be 
amended in order to strengthen the supervision of the non-financial sector in this high-risk 
area. The Law on international restrictive measures, a crucial legislation in the context of 
international and EU sanctions, has yet to be aligned with EU standards. 
In 2021, the Central Bank conducted six inspections of financial institutions to check their 
compliance with the anti-money laundering and anti-terrorist financing legal framework. 


===== PAGE 85 =====
 
84 
 
More targeted inspections were carried out in three banks, and five inspections of reporting 
entities were aimed at checking the fulfilment of measures previously imposed.   
The Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) is embedded in Ministry of Interior since the adoption 
of a new Law on internal affairs in June 2021. In 2021, the FIU conducted 130 controls of 
reporting entities, resulting in the issuance of 124 misdemeanour orders. The FIU received 
299 suspicious transactions reports from taxpayers and 38 876 reports on suspicious cash 
transactions. In 2021, 12 orders of temporary suspension of transactions were issued for a 
total amount of EUR 3.6 million and USD 129 207. Some 38 orders of continuous 
monitoring of accounts against money laundering suspicions were issued. Some 62 
notifications were sent by the FIU to law-enforcement authorities.  
On 30 December 2021, Montenegro decided to extend its investor citizenship programme 
(‘Special Investment Program of Special Importance for the Industry and Economic Interest 
of Montenegro’) for an additional 12 months until December 2022, despite the previously 
announced decision to end the programme in 2021, and despite the recommendations by the 
Commission to phase the scheme out as soon as possible. In March 2022, the Ministry of 
Interior adopted stricter internal and external checks for all applications, which resulted in 
freezing the process of pending applications for the time being. Additional checks for 
applicants from Russia and Belarus were added in May 2022. However, new amendments to 
the decision adopted in June 2022 lowered the financial criteria for acquiring citizenship. A 
bank guarantee amounting to EUR 1 million is now required, instead of EUR 2.5 million 
previously. The amendments also allowed the beneficiaries of the programme to add children 
borne after the submission of the request to the list of family members granted citizenship. 
This scheme poses risks such as money laundering, tax evasion, terrorism financing, 
corruption and infiltration of organised crime and should be terminated. Past citizenship 
decisions should also be reviewed against the security risks they present in the context of 
Russia’s unprovoked aggression against Ukraine. Between January 2019 and May 2022, 934 
applications have been lodged (279 applicants and 655 family members); 409 applications 
have been accepted and 3 applications rejected; 522 applications are being evaluated (152 
applicants and 370 family members). In total, 333 Montenegrin passports have been issued 
under the scheme.  
Chapter 6: Company law  
The EU has common rules on the formation, registration and disclosure requirements of a 
company, with complementary rules for accounting and financial reporting, and statutory 
audit. 
Montenegro has a good level of preparation on company law. Some progress was made 
by adopting the Law on Accounting and on transparency. The recommendation to adopt 
the related rulebook on company financial statements and other recommendations from 
2021 remain valid. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should therefore, in particular: 
→ adopt the rulebook on company financial statements; 
→ further align with the EU acquis on company law; including on encouragement of long-
term shareholder engagement; 
→ complete alignment with the Transparency Directive, including the sanctioning regime. 
On company law, no progress was made to ensure alignment with the EU acquis in this area. 
Further legislative alignment is necessary with the 2019 EU acquis on the use of digital tools, 


===== PAGE 86 =====
 
85 
 
cross-border operations and rules on the encouragement of long-term shareholder 
engagement. In this context, two working groups were established concerning the revision of 
the Law on business organisations and drafting a law on registration of business and other 
entities. The database of companies in the business register should be ready to interconnect 
with EU Member States’ business registers in the future. There is a risk that the revision of 
the Corporate Governance Code - in the work programme of the Capital Market Authority 
(CMA) for 2022 - will not be completed in 2022. Alignment with the acquis on employee 
participation in cross-border mergers is still pending. 
On Transparency, the CMA has established a central registry of regulated information, 
which is the official mechanism for collecting, storing, controlling and publishing regulated 
information. It has a high degree of automation and electronic communication between 
participants at the capital market. Legislative work is underway to achieve full acquis 
alignment on transparency, including on the sanctioning regime. 
On company reporting and statutory audit, the law on accounting aimed at acquis 
alignment has been adopted in December 2021. However, the rulebook on company financial 
statements still needs to be adopted. Currently, all companies must comply with international 
financial reporting standards (IFRS / IFRS for SMEs), while reduced obligations exist for 
micro and small companies (balance sheet and profit and loss account only). The Law on 
auditing contains the essential elements in line with EU requirements, and Montenegro has a 
public audit oversight body (POB), independent of the profession. Statutory audits are 
performed based on international auditing standards (ISAs) and are mandatory for public-
interest entities. Human resource capacities at the Department for Audit Oversight need 
strengthening, with a very limited number of quality inspections carried out.   
Chapter 7: Intellectual property law  
The EU has harmonised rules for the legal protection of intellectual property rights (IPR), as 
well as rules for the legal protection of copyright and related rights. Rules for the legal 
protection of IPR cover, for instance, patents and trademarks, designs, biotechnological 
inventions and pharmaceuticals. Rules for the legal protection of copyright and related rights 
cover, for instance, books, films, computer programmes and broadcasting. 
Montenegro has a good level of preparation on intellectual property law. Overall, some 
progress was made, with good progress on alignment with the EU acquis and preparation 
of a new national intellectual property strategy, and limited progress in track record on 
investigations, prosecutions and judicial follow-up. Last year’s recommendations have, 
therefore, been only partially addressed and remain largely valid.  
In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular:  
→ adopt and start implementing a new and comprehensive national intellectual property 
strategy 2023-2026;  
→ complete legislative alignment on copyright and neighbouring rights, industrial 
property rights and enforcement of intellectual property rights; 
→ improve its track record on investigations, prosecutions and judicial follow-up. 
On copyright and neighbouring rights, alignment with the Collective Rights Management 
Directive was achieved through amendments to the law on copyright. The Parliament also 
adopted the Law on ratification of the Marrakesh Treaty. Further legislative amendments to 
complete alignment on copyright and neighbouring rights are pending adoption. Operating 
licences were issued to two collective management organisations (PAM CG and OFA).  


===== PAGE 87 =====
 
86 
 
Concerning industrial property rights, Parliament adopted the Law on protection of trade 
secret, the Law on ratification of the European Patent Convention and amended the Law on 
patents to implement the European Patent Convention. Further amendments to the Law on 
patents, aimed at aligning with the EU acquis on supplementary protection certificates and 
amendments to the Law on trademarks are pending adoption by the Parliament as is the Law 
on ratification of the Singapore Treaty on the law on trademarks. Preparations for accession 
to the European Patent Convention (EPC) and the European Patent Organisation (EPO) are in 
their final stages. 
On enforcement, reports are regularly submitted to the European Commission on the 
implementation of intellectual property rights. The reporting format on customs enforcement 
of intellectual property rights remains to be fully aligned with Montenegro’s future reporting 
obligations to the Commission. The track record on criminal investigation and prosecution 
remains to be improved in line with EU and international standards. Ex-officio powers should 
be reinforced in this respect. Sanctions and penalties imposed for intellectual property 
infringements appear to be too low to have a deterrent effect. 
The COVID-19 pandemic reduced the scope of activities of the working group against 
infringements of intellectual property rights. In July 2021, a new Coordination Team for the 
implementation of intellectual property rights was created. A day of joint action took place in 
Kotor where compliance of economic entities with IPR was controlled and information 
material distributed. The action plan of the working group for 2022 was adopted. Due to 
numerous restructuring of entities in charge of IPR there is an evident shortfall of staff. 
In the reporting period, in cooperation with the European Union Intellectual Property Office 
(EUIPO), Montenegro implemented several IT tools for the protection of IPR.  
Preparations of Montenegro’s new national intellectual property strategy 2023-2026 
progressed and its adoption is planned by the end of 2022 together with an action plan. It will 
be important to ensure that the strategy will address the remaining identified shortcomings 
and IPR enforcement recommendations from the 2018 peer review report. 
Chapter 8: Competition policy  
EU rules protect free competition. They include antitrust rules against restrictive agreements 
between companies and abuse of dominant position, and also include rules on concentrations 
between companies which would significantly impede effective competition. EU rules also set 
out a system of State aid control. Governments are only allowed to grant State aid if 
restrictive conditions are met, with a view to preventing distortion of competition. 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in this area. Some progress was made by further 
following up the Montenegro Airlines case and including aid to Air Montenegro in the 
2020 report on State aid. Transparency increased with establishing and the use of State aid 
registers as well as timely publishing of decisions and opinions by the State aid authority. 
Last year’s recommendation on non-notified State aid for Montenegro Airlines and others 
remain to be completed.  
In the coming year Montenegro should in particular: 
→ conclude the Montenegro Airlines case and follow up on the establishment of the new 
national air carrier branded Air Montenegro, as well as close other ongoing 
investigations of non-notified State aid and recover the corresponding funds;  
→ in addition to ensuring transparency on all State aid decisions and operational 
independence of the State aid authority, proceed with legislative preparations to devise 


===== PAGE 88 =====
 
87 
 
the Agency for the Protection of Competition with power to impose fines; 
→ further improve the track record in the areas of antitrust/mergers and State aid by 
providing appropriate staffing of the APC, building up administrative capacities of the 
Agency and misdemeanour courts, further promoting the use of leniency policy and 
carrying out more in-depth investigations and on-site inspections. 
Antitrust and mergers 
The legislative framework provides a good level of alignment with the EU acquis and the 
Stabilisation and Association Agreement (Articles 101 and 102 TFEU). Parliament adopted 
amendments to the Law on Protection of Competition in December 2021, primarily to align it 
with the Law on State Administration as concerns staff selection criteria and certain work 
planning arrangements. 
On the institutional framework, the APC is responsible for implementing the legal 
framework. It is an operationally independent authority. The powers of the APC are broadly 
comparable to those of the European Commission in the area of antitrust and mergers. 
Decisions are taken by the Council of the APC, and can be appealed before the 
Administrative Court. Fines can still only be imposed by misdemeanour courts, not directly 
by the APC. A leniency policy for self-reporting cartel members is in place, but real 
implementation is lacking due to the still low level of fines imposed by misdemeanour courts.  
On enforcement capacity, the APC’s administrative and financial capacities remain to be 
strengthened. Only 11 out of the 18 foreseen posts in area of antitrust and mergers are 
occupied, similarly to the previous reporting period. A new President and new members of 
the APC Council were appointed in April 2022.  
On implementation, in the area of prohibited agreements, the APC issued two decisions in 
the reporting period (three in total for the year 2021) and two new proceedings were initiated. 
The total number of ongoing misdemeanour proceedings is 8. However, the majority of 
proceedings processed in the reporting period faced either acquittal by the Misdemeanour 
Court, leading to an appeal of the APC before the High Misdemeanour Court, or 
administrative disputes initiated before the Administrative Court. The numbers and amounts 
of fines imposed by misdemeanour courts remained low, with only one case and fines of 
EUR 900. Due to the high number of appeals the completion of these cases is additionally 
protracted, preventing APC from building its track record and initiating new cases. In the 
reporting period, the Agency resolved two initiatives to investigate competition violations.  
There were no decisions adopted in the area of abuse of a dominant position. In the area of 
concentrations, in 2021, 70 mergers were approved, compared to 50 in 2020, whereas 
between January-June 2022, the Agency issued a total of 32 decisions. One in-depth 
investigation of a merger and two dawn raids were reported. The leniency policy was not 
applied, similarly to the previous periods. The APC issued 14 opinions on legislation in the 
reporting period. To build its track record in the area of antitrust and mergers, the APC 
should increase the number of resolved cases. The APC needs to fully use its enforcement 
powers, carrying out more on-site inspections and further promoting the use of its leniency 
policy as a means to uncover cartels. Finally, the courts’ capacity to handle complex 
competition cases and impose stricter fines remains to be significantly strengthened. 
State aid 
The legislative framework is largely in line with the EU acquis (Articles 107 and 108 
TFEU) and the SAA. The 2018 Law on State aid control sets out the notion of aid as well as 
procedural State aid rules. The last Sixth Amendment of the Temporary Framework for State 


===== PAGE 89 =====
 
88 
 
aid measures to support the economy in the current COVID 19 pandemic was adopted in 
February 2022. Some secondary legislation was adopted in the reporting period.  
As regards the institutional framework, the Agency for Protection of Competition (APC) is 
responsible for implementing the legal framework. The powers of the APC are broadly 
comparable to those of the European Commission in the area of State aid. Decisions are taken 
by the Council of the APC, and can be appealed before the Administrative Court. 
The enforcement capacity of the APC Council remains to be strengthened. Only seven out 
of ten positions are filled in the Sector for State Aid Control, similarly to the previous year.  
On implementation, in the reporting period the APC issued 30 decisions, 13 opinions, while 
19 cases are in procedure - a significant increase compared to previous years. Concerning 
State aid to Montenegro Airlines, a third decision has been adopted in August 2022 ordering 
further recovery of illegal State aid. The Ministry of Capital Investments is still to adopt a 
plan for the recovery of incompatible State aid and to take actions to recover aid as per the 
instructions of APC. The latter confirms the need to further increase the enforcement powers 
of the APC.  
The APC, in the field of State aid, has not yet published opinions or decisions on possible 
State aid in the energy sector, such as on coal subsidies. The APC should continue to monitor 
implementation of State aid rules in large projects undertaken in cooperation with third 
countries. Last year’s recommendation to provide the APC with the means and information in 
this regard has been partially addressed, since the Ministry of Capital Investments and other 
competent authorities provided only partial information.  
Montenegro made progress towards ensuring transparency on State aid decisions, with the 
decisions and opinions being timely published on the Agency’s website. Additionally, the 
general register of State aid cases was created in the reporting period, which can further 
contribute to the transparency along with the two specialised registers (COVID and de 
minimis). Each major grantor of aid appointed responsible persons to enter information in the 
registers. The APC’s database is increasing. All concerned institutions should further 
contribute to strengthening the position of the APC and its Council thus ensuring an 
independent and functioning system of State aid control, which is fundamental for 
Montenegro’s progress on its path into the European Union. The APC should continue to 
advocate for further strengthening awareness of State aid rules among aid grantors at both 
central and local levels. 
Liberalisation 
The Law on the protection of competition and the Law on State aid control apply to public 
undertakings and undertakings with special or exclusive rights. This does not apply to cases 
where the laws would obstruct the performance of the particular tasks of services of general 
economic interest (SGEI) assigned to such undertakings, in line with Article 106 TFEU and 
with the SAA. There are no monopolies of a commercial character as provided for in Article 
37 TFEU. 
Chapter 9: Financial services  
EU rules aim to ensure fair competition between and the stability of financial institutions, 
namely banking, insurance, supplementary pensions, investment services and securities 
markets. They include rules on authorisation, operation and supervision of these institutions.  


===== PAGE 90 =====
 
89 
 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of financial services. Overall, some 
progress was achieved in the reporting period, with good progress in the area of bank and 
financial conglomerates, some progress on insurance and no progress on capital markets. 
Last year’s recommendations were met to a substantial degree in the banking area.  
In the coming year, Montenegro should: 
→ Complete legislative alignment with and implementation of the capital requirements 
and bank recovery and resolution legislation,  
→ Advance work on the drafts of the Law on Insurance, Law on investment funds, Law 
on alternative investment funds and Law on pension funds, aligned with EU legislation.  
The legislation is partially aligned with the EU acquis on banks and financial 
conglomerates. Laws on credit institutions and on resolution of credit institutions and most 
of their implementing legislation (aimed at alignment with Basel III standards) have applied 
since January 2022, bringing the legal framework closer to the current EU rules. Work is still 
ongoing on adopting and implementing some of the related regulatory acts and documents 
that were produced by the European Banking Authority (EBA) and the Single Resolution 
Board (SRB). Work is also in progress on further changes to the banking legislation, aimed at 
alignment with the latest EU rules on the resolution of credit institutions.  
The Central Bank of Montenegro (CBM), in cooperation with the EBA, initiated the 
procedure for assessing the equivalence of Montenegro’s regulatory and supervisory 
framework for credit institutions with EU rules. The CBM also started negotiating a 
cooperation agreement with the SRB on the exchange of information and cooperation in the 
area of resolution planning and implementation for banks and financial conglomerates 
operating on a cross-border basis.  
The CBM adopted, since the outbreak of the COVID-19 crisis, eleven packages of temporary 
measures to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on the banking sector and improve the 
country’s financial stability. The independent review of the asset quality in all banks (AQR), 
which started in February 2020, was completed in September 2021. The results of the AQR 
exercise confirmed the stability of the banking sector of Montenegro, a satisfactory asset 
quality and capital adequacy of the banking system. The solvency ratio of the banking sector, 
adjusted after the AQR was finalised, amounted to 16.2%, substantially above the statutory 
minimum of 10%.  
On insurance and occupational pensions, the Insurance Supervision Agency (ISA) 
continued working on the new Law on insurance, which should ensure further alignment with 
the main EU acquis, the Solvency II Directive and the Insurance Distribution Directive. In 
parallel, adjustments to the current Law on insurance, expanding the powers of ISA in 
preparation for its future role, entered into force. Changes to the Law on compulsory traffic 
insurance, allowing for the alignment with the Motor Vehicles Directive, entered into force in 
January 2022.   
On financial market infrastructure, securities markets and investment services, legal 
alignment with the EU acquis on investment funds (UCITS Directive), alternative investment 
funds (AIFMD Directive) and pension funds (IORP Directive) remains pending.  
Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection  
EU rules protect consumers’ economic interests and in relation to product safety, dangerous 
imitations and liability for defective products. The EU also ensures high common standards 
for tobacco control, blood, tissues, cells and organs. The EU also ensures high common 


===== PAGE 91 =====
 
90 
 
standards for upholding patients’ rights in cross-border healthcare and tackling serious 
cross-border health threats including communicable diseases. 
Montenegro is moderately prepared on consumer and health protection. Overall, limited 
progress was made on last year’s recommendations, notably regarding alignment to the EU 
acquis in the field of health protection, whereas some progress was made in the area of 
consumer protection and improving the capacity for its implementation. Therefore, 
recommendations from last year remain broadly valid. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should: 
→ complete the alignment of national legislation with the EU consumer protection acquis, 
as well as the alignment of national legislation with the EU health protection acquis on 
substances of human origin, tobacco control and patients’ rights in cross-border health 
care; 
→ reinforce administrative capacities to ensure the full implementation of the EU acquis 
under this chapter; 
→ adopt a new strategy for the development of the healthcare system in Montenegro. 
Consumer protection  
Regarding the legislative framework for consumer protection, the Law on consumer 
protection was amended in December 2021 in order to ensure alignment with the EU acquis, 
but it still needs to be further aligned with the latest EU consumer protection legislation. The 
law enabled a new Consumer Protection Council to be established, the main role of which is 
continuous enforcement and implementation of consumer protection rules. A national 
consumer protection programme 2022-2024 was also adopted. Legislation on alternative 
dispute resolutions and consumer credits is aligned with the EU acquis, except in the area of 
consumer credits related to residential immovable property. Full alignment of legislation on 
market surveillance of products has yet to be completed. Between December 2021 and March 
2022, Montenegrin authorities competent for consumer protection carried out a joint 
extensive action to control online trade market, including systemic checks (“sweeps”), 
equivalent to those implemented at the EU level. Following the control of websites of 62 
business entities engaged in the sale of goods in sectors such as clothing, household goods 
and electrical appliances, shortcomings were identified and addressed, resulting in higher 
share of websites that are in line with the rules of distance selling of goods and services.    
The central information system for consumer protection was updated to facilitate consumer 
complaints in autumn 2021. Administrative capacities of the Administration for Inspection 
Affairs were strenghtened by hiring 11 inspectors for consumer protection. 31 629 
inspections were performed in the field of consumer protection, identifying 4 021 
irregularities leading to administrative and punitive measures. 
On product safety, Montenegro’s legal basis is designed to be aligned with the EU acquis. 2 
253 inspections were conducted, including 1 822 inspections in the context of proactive 
surveillance and 247 inspections in reactive surveillance, identifying 944 dangerous products 
(31 320 items). Accordingly, administrative measures were imposed, including withdrawal of 
products from the market as well as permanent or temporary circulation ban, destruction and 
return to the producer/distributor. Withdrawal of products from the market (permanent 
circulation ban) for dangerous and non-compliant products was imposed on 315 product 
types, in the amount of 33 845 pieces. 
Public health  


===== PAGE 92 =====
 
91 
 
On public health, national legislation on healthcare remains partly aligned with the EU 
acquis. In 2021, the health budget (6.811 % of GDP) decreased slightly, compared with 
2020. Montenegro’s integrated health information system was used at the primary, 
secondary and tertiary care level, following the completion of the information system in the 
Clinical Centre of Montenegro (CCM). Connecting the information systems of CCM and the 
Institute for Public Health (IPH) has not been completed. Currently there is no strategy in 
place for the development of the health sector in general. 
Despite some actions by relevant institutions/bodies, the issue of anti-microbial resistance is 
still insufficiently addressed. In view of the application of the EU guidelines for decreasing 
the use of antibiotics, Montenegro adopted a Programme on bacterial resistance to antibiotics 
control with the related action plan 2022-2024 in June 2022 and has a national surveillance 
system in place for antimicrobial resistance in humans. Generally, antibiotics and other 
medicines were prescribed less in 2021 than in previous years.  
On tobacco control, the national legislation on smoking in public places and the sale of 
tobacco products to minors is still not sufficiently enforced, even though there was some 
limited reinforcement of the capacities of relevant inspectors.  
On alcohol related harm reduction, the government adopted a programme and an action 
plan for the prevention of harmful use of alcohol and disorders caused by alcohol 
consumption for the period 2022-2024. On drug abuse prevention and harm reduction, 
efforts focused on treatment and prevention actions are organised by the civil society 
organisations. Opioid substitution treatment is available at primary health care centres. 
However, the rehabilitation and social integration of drug addicts was problematic, as they 
needed to participate themselves in covering the costs of the rehabilitation programmes 
provided by a state centre. Adequate support to minor drug users with mental diseases is not 
available, and there is no specific healthcare entity for this group of drug users.  
The 2021-2023 action plan for the implementation of the strategy for the improvement of 
mental health (2019-2023) was adopted in November 2021.  
On blood, tissues, cells and organs, the national blood transfusion institute adopted its 
criteria for the selection of blood donors after immunisation with COVID-19 vaccine, which 
are harmonised with the recommendations of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and 
Control (ECDC). In the field of substances of human origin, Montenegro has adopted 
implementing legislation in order to further align with the relevant EU acquis.  
National legislation on patients’ rights in cross-border healthcare is partly aligned with the 
EU acquis. In the field of serious cross-border health threats and communicable diseases, 
the Institute for Public Health continued COVID-19 related activities. The institute, the 
Ministry of Health and other health institutions were all active in communicating information 
to the citizens on prevention measures and relevance of immunisation. Due to the 
epidemiological situation in the last quarter of 2021, Montenegro banned entry of citizens to 
malls and hospitality venues without COVID certificates, which contributed to an increased 
vaccination rate. Some of the restrictive measures were lifted in spring 2022 but others were 
maintained such as those related to wearing a mask. By the end of August 2022, almost 46% 
of the population received two doses of the COVID-19 vaccination, and over 16% of the 
population received three doses. Montenegro aligned itself with the requirements of the EU 
COVID-19 digital certificates and started issuing compliant certificates for its citizens on 30 
December 2021. Montenegro is part of viral respiratory disease surveillance networks 
                                                            
 


===== PAGE 93 =====
 
92 
 
managed by ECDC and reports to it on several communicable diseases, but it should improve 
the timeliness and completeness of the reported data.   
The government adopted the programme for fighting HIV/AIDS for the period 2021-2023 
and the action plan for 2021-2022. The prevention measures in the programme are primarily 
related to the promotion of protective behaviour among key population groups. The action 
plan of the programme for the control and prevention of non-communicable diseases in 
Montenegro for 2021 was adopted in July 2021. 
On health inequalities, access to healthcare services remains available for all vulnerable 
groups, with the exception of persons without regulated legal status, including Roma and 
Egyptians, as well as population living in remote rural areas. According to available 
information, the health care of children with disabilities is poor. Due to the lack of staff in 
health care institutions, they have to wait for specialist examinations (specifically for child 
neuropsychiatrists) for several months. Children with developmental disorders cannot get 
adequate treatment on time. 
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH  
This cluster covers chapters 10-digital transformation and media, 16-taxation, 17-economic 
and monetary policy, 19-social policy and employment, 20-industrial policy, 25-science and 
research, 26-education and culture, and 29-customs. All eight chapters are open, with closing 
benchmarks set in all but two, namely chapter 25-science and research and 26-education and 
culture – both of which are provisionally closed. Closing benchmarks remain to be fulfilled in 
each of the other six chapters. This cluster and the reforms concerned have significant links to 
Montenegro’s Economic Reform Programme. 
Some progress was achieved in different areas e.g. alignment with the Broadband Cost 
Reduction Directive, tax legislation as well as administrative cooperation and mutual 
assistance; as well as on further implementation of the revised industrial policy. There was 
slow progress on preparations for accession to the Convention on common transit procedure, 
on implementing actions foreseen in the trade facilitation strategy 2018¬-2022 and 
implementation of the action plan for alignment with the EU acquis in the area of economic 
and monetary policies. 
In the coming period, Montenegro is invited to step up legislative alignment in the electronic 
communications, information technologies and audiovisual media sectors and ensure the 
media sector’s independence; make further progress on removing VAT and other exemptions 
that are not aligned to the EU acquis; alignment with the EU monetary and economic 
policies, including on cooperation and coordination amongst relevant public authorities; 
monitor the implementation labour law, in addition to focusing on the employment activation 
measures in addition to the further development of the Youth Guarantee: continuing efforts 
on improving safety at work particularly regarding labour inspection; continue implementing 
the revised industrial policy and strengthen inter-ministerial cooperation; continue to support 
financially research and innovation especially regarding smart specialisation and the Green 
and Digital Agendas; build on the quality and accessibility of education and training and plan 
for further education reform; and establish an EU-compatible, computerised common transit 
system.   
Chapter 10: Digital transformation and media 
The EU supports the smooth functioning of the internal market for electronic 
communications, electronic commerce and audio-visual services. The rules protect 
consumers and support universal availability of modern services. 


===== PAGE 94 =====
 
93 
 
Montenegro remains moderately prepared in the area of digital transformation and media. 
There was limited progress, during the reporting period mainly through the alignment 
with the Broadband Cost Reduction Directive and by the adoption of strategic documents 
on information society. No progress was made on last year’s recommendations, which thus 
remain valid.  
In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ progress in aligning with the EU acquis on electronic communications and information 
technologies and complete legislative alignment on audio-visual media, ensuring the 
operational independence of the media regulators and the public service broadcaster; 
→ progress in granting the Agency for Electronic Media (AEM) powers to impose a 
complete set of measures, including warnings, fines, suspensions and revocation of 
licenses ensuring proportionality and effectiveness; 
→ establish a track record demonstrating the administrative capacity to enforce the EU 
acquis for electronic communications, information society services and in particular 
audio-visual media services, including as regards regulatory independence. 
In the reporting period, the government adopted the roadmap for the fulfilment of the closing 
benchmarks for Chapter 10.  
The Ministry of Economic Development and Tourism is in charge of electronic 
communications and information technologies. In December 2021, the Parliament adopted 
the law on the use of physical infrastructure for the installation of high-speed electronic 
communications, thus aligning with the EU broadband cost reduction directive. Broadband 
infrastructure development progressed with support by the EU. According to Montenegrin 
statistical information, fixed broadband connection is used by 97% of households and 69% of 
those have data transfer rates of at least 30 Mb/s.  Montenegro has created conditions for 5G 
connections. At the start of 2022, a working group was formed to draft the 5G strategy for 
2023–2027. The roadmap for the deployment of 5G mobile networks was adopted in 
December 2021, while the adoption of the national 5G roll-out and allocation of the 
commercial 5G spectrum are expected in the course of 2022. Radio-frequencies in the 900 
MHz, 1800 MHz, 2 GHz and 2.6 GHz bands were successfully auctioned. The Regional 
Roaming Agreement was fully implemented.  
The 112 European emergency number is functioning with an e-call service successfully tested 
and in use. 
Digital transformation is under the responsibility of the Ministry of Public Administration. 
In December 2021, the government adopted the Digital Transformation Strategy 2022-2026, 
the Strategy for Digitalisation of the Education System 2022-2026, and the Law on Electronic 
Documents. Montenegro still needs to complete its alignment with the EU acquis on 
electronic communications and information technologies, such as the European Electronics 
Communication Code, the Network and Information Security Directive, the Toolbox for 5G 
Cybersecurity, the Open Data Directive and the e-Privacy Directive. The number of e-
government services is 410, from 50 institutions.  During the first quarter of 2022, the 
government offered e-payment opportunities and electronic identification (digital ID cards) 
for a selected number of services. Moreover, the government improved the user experience 
and the scope of the open data portal data.gov.me, which currently offers 197 datasets. A 
new, improved government web portal (gov.me) was developed and introduced.  


===== PAGE 95 =====
 
94 
 
The cyber security strategy 2022-2026, with an action plan, was adopted in December 2021. 
The government also decided to strengthen the national capacities for cyber security, 
including the establishment of a cybersecurity agency.  
The Ministry of Culture and Media is the legislative body on audio-visual policy. The 
regulatory Agency for Electronic Media (AEM) continued to exercise its mandate in a 
professional manner. In January 2022, the AEM suspended the broadcasting of several shows 
of the Belgrade-based Happy TV in Montenegro for a period of six months, for inciting 
hatred, intolerance and discrimination against ethnic Montenegrins. The overlap in 
jurisdiction concerning media oversight during elections remained. The Agency still lacks the 
authority and measures to effectively monitor and penalise broadcasters and legal provisions 
and its operational capacity remains to be strengthened.  
The law on audio-visual media services, the amendments to the law on media and the law on 
the national public broadcaster remain to be adopted. Montenegro should ensure alignment to 
the 2018 revision of the EU Directive on the audio-visual media services, recommendations 
and legal opinions of Council of Europe and OSCE. The consistency of the three laws needs 
to be ensured and the legislative process conducted in an inclusive and transparent manner, in 
dialogue with all relevant stakeholders. Financial support to media through the newly 
established Media Pluralism and Diversity Fund started. The Ministry of Public 
Administration, Digital Society, and Media continued working on the comprehensive Media 
Strategy of Montenegro 2022-2026, which includes fight against disinformation and 
promotion of media literacy. 
Chapter 16: Taxation  
EU rules on taxation cover value-added tax and excise duties as well as aspects of corporate 
taxation. They also deal with cooperation between tax administrations, including the 
exchange of information to prevent tax evasion.  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of taxation. Some progress was made 
notably on improving tax legislation as well as administrative cooperation and mutual 
assistance. The recommendations related to TADAT (tax administration diagnostic 
assessment tool) analysis, value-added tax (VAT) exemptions and building capacities of the 
Revenue and Customs Administration from 2021 remain valid. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular:  
→ continue to implement the action plan addressing the issues highlighted by the TADAT 
analysis; 
→ further remove VAT and other tax exemptions that are not aligned to the EU acquis; 
→ adopt a strategic plan in order to further develop capacities of the Revenue and Customs 
Administration and to prevent the outflow of qualified and trained staff. 
In the area of indirect taxation, in December 2021, the Parliament adopted amendments to 
the Law on value added tax, which stipulate that VAT is calculated and paid at a reduced rate 
of 7% of the transactions for services for the preparation and serving of food, drinks and 
beverages, except alcoholic beverages, carbonated beverages with added sugar and coffee in 
facilities providing hospitality services. In May 2022, the law was further amended, 
introducing gradual reduction of VAT rates on trade and imports of flour and sunflower oil, 
salt and pellets.  At the same time, the Law on excise duties was amended reducing the excise 
duty for unleaded petrol and gas oils and increasing it for smokeless tobacco products and 
introducing disposable plastic products in the excise system. Montenegro also further aligned 


===== PAGE 96 =====
 
95 
 
its indirect tax legislation to the EU acquis by requiring leisure boats to pay VAT and excise 
when refuelling.   
In December 2021, the Parliament adopted an important set of laws on direct taxation. 
Amendments to the Law on personal income tax introduced a dual system of income 
taxation, strengthening tax discipline and providing incentives to attract certain categories of 
taxpayers. Dual system implies proportional and progressive rates of personal income tax, 
depending on the source of income. The new legal solutions also prescribe exemption from 
personal income tax on specific cases. In parallel, amendments to the Law on contributions 
for compulsory social insurance abolished health contributions borne by the employer and the 
employee, to ensure a reduction in the tax burden on labour. Amendments to the Law on 
unified registration and reporting system on calculation and collection of taxes and 
contributions brought legal technical harmonisation with the Law on contributions for 
compulsory social insurance, i.e. deletion of the conceptual category related to the health 
insurance. The Law on rescheduling of tax claims provided legal and natural persons facing 
liquidity problems with an incentive to resolve their situation regarding the payment of tax 
liabilities, (i.e. to reschedule their tax debt). Finally, amendments to the Law on corporate 
profit tax aligned national legislation with the EU acquis on the common system of taxation 
applicable in the case of parent companies and subsidiaries of different EU Member States as 
well as on the common system of taxation applicable to interest and royalty payments 
between associated companies of different Member States. In April 2022, the Law on real 
estate tax was amended with regard to market values of real estates.   
Regarding administrative cooperation and mutual assistance, in December 2021, 
amendments to the Law on tax administration were adopted, aligning it with the relevant EU 
acquis. This provides the legal basis for mandatory automatic exchange of tax information 
between the Revenue and Customs Administration of Montenegro and the competent 
authorities of the EU Member States. 
A self-assessment of the Revenue and Customs Administration of Montenegro is ongoing to 
test the country’s readiness to start the envisaged automatic exchange of financial account 
information in the OECD framework on base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS), scheduled 
for September 2023. Montenegro has completed double taxation agreements with 25 EU 
Member States. 
On operational capacity and computerisation, progress was registered in terms of 
introduction of the Integrated Information System (IRMS), as well as the modernisation of 
business processes in accordance with current trends in the digitalisation of services. The 
application of the real-time online fiscalisation system started on 1 June 2021 for all 
taxpayers. 
No progress was registered as to the technical capacity and infrastructure needed for the 
application of the EU IT systems, such as Excise Movement Control System (EMCS) and 
VAT Information Exchange System (VIES). The Revenue and Customs Administration still 
needs to adopt a human resources strategy as well as personnel and training plans. 
Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy 
EU rules require the independence of central banks and prohibit them from directly financing 
the public sector. Member States coordinate their economic policies and are subject to fiscal, 
economic and financial surveillance.  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of economic and monetary policy. 
Limited progress was achieved on meeting last year’s recommendations, mainly on 
implementation of the action plan for alignment with the EU acquis. The 2022-2024 


===== PAGE 97 =====
 
96 
 
Economic Reform Programme (ERP) was adopted on time. The design quality of the ERP 
economic and fiscal policies as well as the reform measures improved. However, the level 
of implementation of some reforms remains weak. Moreover, the chronic lack of 
resources to handle government finance statistics at the Montenegrin Statistical Office 
(Monstat) continues to hamper progress in this chapter. Last year’s recommendations 
remain valid. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should: 
→ continue to implement the revised action plan for alignment with the EU acquis under 
this chapter;  
→ ensure adequate capacities of, and cooperation and coordination of tasks between, the 
Ministry of Finance, the Central Bank of Montenegro and Monstat on the production 
of government finance statistics and fiscal notifications aligned with ESA 2010 
methodology. 
Montenegro does not have standard monetary policy tools at its disposal, as it uses the euro 
as legal tender, leaving fiscal policy as the main macroeconomic policy instrument. 
Montenegro’s use of the euro, which was decided by the authorities under exceptional 
circumstances, is fully distinct from membership of the euro area. 
In December 2021, the government adopted a roadmap to fulfil conditions for the provisional 
closure of negotiations in chapter 17. The roadmap also identifies horizontal links between 
chapter 17 and other chapters (namely chapters 4, 9, 18 and 32) and clusters, in line with the 
revised enlargement methodology. 
The Action plan for alignment with the EU acquis under this chapter was revised at the 
beginning of 2022. The Central Bank of Montenegro continued working on amendments to 
the Law on the Central Bank, with the technical assistance of the International Monetary 
Fund. Amendments are foreseen to be adopted in the last quarter of 2022.  
On economic policy, there was some further alignment with the Council Directive 
2011/85/EU on requirements for budgetary frameworks of the Member States. New elements 
of programme budgeting and medium-term planning were introduced with the adoption of 
2021 budget. However, performance indicators are still being developed. Delays in the 
introduction of accrual accounting and production of government finance statistics based on 
the European System of Accounts (ESA 2010) standards remain a key obstacle in this 
chapter. There was no progress with coverage of Montenegro`s fiscal notifications. 
Moreover, Montenegro failed to submit the excessive deficit procedures tables in April 2022 
as requested by Eurostat. Coordination between the Ministry of Finance, the Central Bank of 
Montenegro and Monstat needs to significantly improve for the production of necessary 
statistics.  
Amendments to the Law on budget and fiscal responsibility that would create conditions for 
the establishment of an independent fiscal council, to strengthen the oversight of the fiscal 
policy in the country, are expected to be adopted along with the 2023 budget.  
The government adopted and submitted its 2022-2024 Economic Reform Programme 
(ERP) on 31 January 2022. The economic consequences of Russia’s war against Ukraine and 
surging inflation may render the macro-fiscal scenarios, presented in the document, partially 
obsolete. However, medium-term fiscal and structural reform challenges and the 
programme’s priorities remain valid. Overall, the quality and design of economic policy 
measures has improved, but efforts need to continue in order to avoid delays with the 
implementation of the policy guidance jointly agreed with the EU. 


===== PAGE 98 =====
 
97 
 
Chapter 19: Social Policy and employment 
 EU rules in the social field include minimum legal labour standards, equality, health and 
safety at work and non-discrimination and promote social dialogue.  
Montenegro has some level of preparation on social policy and employment. Some 
progress was made during the reporting period, including the amendment to the Child 
protection law and the reduction of the tax wedge. 
While some steps have been made, the recommendations from last year’s report remain 
valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular:  
→ reform and strengthen the Employment Agency in order to allow it to play its role as a 
modern public employment service, designing and implementing quality employment 
activation measures, ensuring these are targeted, including at young people women, 
persons with disabilities, vulnerable persons and minorities, including Roma. Continue 
preparations focused on the establishment and implementation of the Youth Guarantee; 
→ monitor implementation of the revised labour law and reinforce staffing in and the 
institutional structure of the labour inspectorate, also ensuring that issues; regarding 
women, persons with disabilities, minorities including Roma and vulnerable people, are 
more robustly addressed.  Improve health and safety at work issues by setting up the 
occupational health and safety fund; 
→ continue the reform of the social protection system based on the Roadmap of Social 
Protection Reform.  Adopt and implement the strategy on de-institutionalisation. 
In December 2021 the Parliament adopted amendments to the labour law, as part of the 
comprehensive reform package ‘Europe Now’, it is noted that some of these amendments 
foresaw an increase by 80% of the minimum wage. Amendments to the Law on pensions and 
Disability Insurance, as well as the Law on Protection of Employed Citizens of Montenegro 
Posted to Work Abroad were adopted in December 2021. Although in July 2021, the 
Government re-established the Chapter 19 Working Group that includes relevant social and 
civil society partners the group is not yet functioning. Following the formation of the new 
Government in April 2022, the competences shared between the Ministry of Finance and 
Social Welfare and Ministry of Economic Development were reintegrated back into the 
reconstituted Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare.  In addition, more should be done to 
have in place legal protections for women employed under fixed-term employment contracts.    
Concerning 
health 
and 
safety 
at 
work, 
in 
September 
2021, 
the  
Ministry of Economic Development established a multi-sector Working Group, tasked with 
the development of the National Strategy for Occupational Safety and Health (2022-2027) 
and the Action Plan for implementation for 2022. The occupational safety and health fund, 
foreseen under the previous sector strategies (2010-2014 and 2016-2020), has not however 
yet been established. From January 2021 to December 2021, it was reported that there were 
four fatal (the same amount than the previous year) and 21 serious accidents at work (four 
more than in 2020). Four collective accidents were reported. 
On social dialogue, the impact of the relevant provisions in the labour law are not yet visible. 
The tripartite Social Council is functioning, but steps still need to be taken to ensure it is fully 
embedded into national policy-making. During 2020 three sessions had taken place in the 
period prior to July. In addition, an extension of the validity of the general collective 
bargaining agreement was made until the end of 2022 as the new agreement has still not been 
adopted.  


===== PAGE 99 =====
 
98 
 
On employment policy, in December 2021 the Government adopted the National Strategy 
for Employment for the period 2021-2025 and the 2022 Action Plan for Employment. 
Monitoring of the implementation of the National strategy for Employment will remain a 
challenge, as it was with the previous Strategy as a result of the scarcity of data. Overall, the 
effectiveness and coverage of active labour market policies remains insufficient. The 
Employment Agency requires substantial reform and strengthening, as amongst other things 
it is not yet ready to take on the challenge of delivering the Youth Guarantee and promoting 
up and reskilling actions. Additionally, the discrepancy of the ratio of workers in the Agency 
between branch offices and at central level has not yet been addressed. A partial recovery on 
the labour market in Q3 of 2021 came on the back of the economic rebound. The rate of long-
term unemployed over one year decreased from 65.6% to 63.7% between Q1 and Q4 of 2021. 
Overall unemployment was recorded at 16.8% compared to 18.3% in the previous year. 
Differences across regions remain, with the unemployment rate being low at 7.4 % in the 
coastal region, 11.3% in the central region and 30.8% in the north according to data from Q4 
2021. The most vulnerable groups on the labour market remain women, youth, Roma, 
persons with disabilities and low skilled workers. The share of young people (15-29) not in 
education, employment or training (NEET) had decreased by only 0.1% (from 26.6% to 
26.5%) between Q4 2020 and Q4 2021 according to an International Labour Organisation 
report. To tackle this in December 2021 the Government adopted a programme for youth 
employment in 2022, as a precursor to the Youth Guarantee scheme. Regarding the latter, the 
institutional focal point for the introduction of the YG scheme and the Working Group that 
should manage its setup has been appointed. While reinforced efforts are still required so to 
tackle issues related to the informal economy during the year Montenegro took policy steps 
which led to a reduction in the tax wedge on labour. Regarding labour inspection, an 
appropriate legislative framework with sufficient resources and a modernised planning of 
inspection activities with improved coordination among the different inspection bodies, 
addressing issues such as gender which impact disproportionately on women, is not yet in 
place. In the reporting period, no progress was noted regarding the efficiency of the linkage 
between the database of the Employment Agency and the Tax Administration. Employment 
and social services are still insufficiently coordinated. The digitalisation process of the 
Employment Agency has not been finalised and its coordination with social welfare centres 
remains an issue to be addressed.   
As regards the activities focused preparing for the European Social Fund (ESF), the 
implementation of the Sector Operational Programme for human resources development 
(2015-2017) moved towards its final stage, as planned.  (See also Chapter 22 - Regional 
policy and coordination of structural instruments). 
The social protection and inclusion sector continues to face serious human resource and 
capacity limitations. While the review of the social protection system was finalised in April 
2021 and a Roadmap of Reforms was published in July 2021, insufficient steps have been 
taken to move reform forward. In December 2021, the Child Protection Law was amended, 
expanding child allowance to children up to 18 years old. In parallel, the Law on 
Compensation of former beneficiaries of benefits based on the birth of three or more children 
was adopted. In the reporting period, centres for social work continued to be under-staffed. 
Furthermore, the performance of the centres were affected by changes in management and 
expansion of responsibilities. Social welfare centres still do not have the capacities to help the 
Ministry to implement the transition from institutional service provision to community-based 
care. The Institute of Social and Child Protection still requires strengthening in terms of 
resources. Social services provided at local level continue to be underfunded. During the 
reporting period, the implementation of the integrated Social Welfare Information System 


===== PAGE 100 =====
 
99 
 
(SWIS) proceeded, and it is reported as being operational in all centres for social work and 
social and child protection institutions. According to the Survey of Income and Living 
Conditions (SILC - data for December 2021), the national “at-risk-of-poverty” (AROP) rate 
was 22.6 %, whereas for children it stood at 32.6 %. Negatively the country does not have a 
focused poverty strategy. On de-institutionalisation of children in care, no progress has been 
registered in the transition to community and family-based services: professional foster care 
has not been introduced and the adoption of the Strategy on de-institutionalisation is still 
pending (expected Q4, 2022).  The Council for the Care of Persons with Disabilities does not 
yet have its members appointed.  
On non-discrimination in employment and social policy, the draft Law on Professional 
Rehabilitation and Employment of Persons with Disabilities and the draft Law on Unified 
Disability Determination system are being revised but is still pending adoption. As regards 
services provided by civil society organisations, the number of service provision licences for 
NGOs did increase thanks to some review of administrative constraints. However, 
consultation with civil society in the context of the drafting of the new Social Protection 
Strategy has still been insufficient. So far, no concrete results of the Roma inclusion strategy 
for 2021-2025 in line with the EU Roma strategic framework are visible. Progress on the 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and queer (LGBTIQ) strategy (2019-2023) is 
unclear. More generally, civil society organisations still need to be better integrated in the 
decision-making processes.  
On equality between women and men in employment and social policy, according to 
MONSTAT Labour Force Survey, in the course of 2021, the gender gap between male and 
female employment rates (population aged 20-64) persisted with a difference of 8.6 % 
percentage points in Q4 2021, as compared to 13.6 % in Q4 2020. Moreover, the gender gap 
in employment and pay, workplace sexual harassment, affordable childcare, unpaid work and 
tax benefit systems are all issues having negative impact on equality between women and 
men, and they still require action. Due to lack of data, it is not possible to state how many 
cases of sexual harassment have come to trial. In parallel, more can be done in terms of 
raising public awareness on this issue, including via the Ombudsperson office and through 
actively supporting women’s NGOs. No progress has been made regarding legislative and 
non-legislative measures focused on work-life balance. 
Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy  
EU industrial policy enhances competitiveness, facilitates structural change and encourages 
an enterprise-friendly environment that stimulates small and medium sized enterprises. 
Montenegro is moderately prepared/has a good level of preparation on enterprise and 
industrial policy. Some progress was made in implementing the enterprise and industrial 
policy, as per 2021 recommendation. Inter and intra-ministerial cooperation on both 
technical and political levels should be further developed to ensure consistency of different 
national strategies and programmes, including industrial policy, smart specialisation and 
the Economic Reform Programme. Previous recommendations remain broadly valid. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should: 
→ continue the implementation of its revised industrial policy, in cooperation with 
relevant stakeholders; 
→ accelerate legal alignment with the EU Late Payment Directive by adopting 
amendments to the law on deadlines for settlement of monetary obligations; 


===== PAGE 101 =====
 
100 
 
→ ensure continuous coordination of industrial policy with other key national strategies. 
On enterprise and industrial policy principles, a new strategy for the development of 
women's entrepreneurship 2021-2024 was adopted in October 2021, together with the 
accompanying action plan for 2021-2022. Work advanced on establishing the Credit 
Guarantee Fund in 2022, a support mechanism facilitating access to credit for MSMEs 
through the banking sector. The reforms of the corporate governance in the state-owned 
enterprises need to be prioritised, in line with the Economic Reform Programme 
commitments. Alignment with the EU acquis on combating late payments, through 
amendments to the law on deadlines for settlement of monetary obligations, is still pending. 
On enterprise and industrial policy instruments, the implementation of different 
programmes for the development of entrepreneurship and private sector continued under the 
overarching Programme for Improving the Competitiveness of the Economy. The financial 
allocations were reduced in 2021 because of the phase-out of temporary COVID-19 support 
and amounted to EUR 3 million overall. Businesses were consulted prior to the adoption of 
the Programme, for the first time, and the whole application process was digitalised. A single 
on-line portal for SME support (Single Access Point; www.biznis.gov.me) was launched in 
June 2022, which will provide all necessary information and contacts regarding advice and 
assistance for businesses. As of May 2022, 410 public services were available on the e-
government Portal, of which 99 were interactive and 311 informational.  
In 2021, the Investment and Development Fund of Montenegro (IDF) provided financing 
worth EUR 210.3 million to Montenegrin enterprises, and additional EUR 74.7 million by the 
end of May 2022. IDF launched a new programme to support the development of green 
businesses in August 2021. In November 2021, IDF signed a EUR 50 million loan agreement 
with the EIB to support faster recovery of the local economy from COVID-19 and help 
introduce energy-efficient practices among small businesses in the country. 
Montenegro expressed its interest to participate in the Single Market Programme (SMP). 
Formal negotiations for an Association Agreement started in March 2022 and are 
progressing.  
On sectoral policies, an action plan for the implementation of industrial policy for 2021-2022 
was adopted in October 2021, allocating EUR 450.8 million for the planned activities. 
Government’s work programme for 2022 is focused on the synergies between Industrial 
Policy and the Smart Specialisation Strategy. In December 2021 the government adopted 
guidelines for the revitalization and development of manufacturing industry. The document 
defines measures and activities that should contribute to the establishment of a modern 
industrial base in Montenegro. The 2021 report on the Implementation of Industrial Policy of 
Montenegro 2019-2023 is yet to be adopted.  
As regards innovation policy (see also chapter 25, Science and Research), two new structures 
were established in 2021 - the Council for Innovation and Smart Specialization and the 
Innovation Fund of Montenegro.  
Despite some progress on inter and intra-ministerial cooperation, in particular when preparing 
the Economic Reform Programme 2022-2024, cooperation on technical and political levels 
should be further reinforced. The number of sectoral strategies, actions plans and reports 
should be further decreased and activities consolidated, in order to facilitate the efficient 
management of enterprise and industrial policy. 
Chapter 25: Science and Research  


===== PAGE 102 =====
 
101 
 
The EU provides significant support to research and innovation. All Member States can 
benefit from the EU’s research programmes, especially where there is scientific excellence 
and solid investment in research.  
Montenegro has a good level of preparation in this sector. Good progress was made on 
each of the 2021 recommendations through continued implementation of the Smart 
Specialisation Strategy and by starting participation in the Horizon Europe programme. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ further advance implementation of the Smart Specialisation Strategy while taking steps 
to make the Innovation Fund fully operational; 
→ strengthen structures of academia-business cooperation and further support the 
knowledge transfer between them; 
→ increase investments in research and innovation programmes and participation in the 
Horizon Europe programme, ensuring that this also targets women. 
On research and innovation (R&I) policy, the implementation of related strategies 
continued, and support for innovative projects were provided through a number of 
programmes, including pre-acceleration for start-ups. Montenegro adopted five pieces of by-
laws in order to fully implement the legal framework for innovation. A memorandum on 
cooperation within the National Open Science Cloud Initiative was signed by nine 
Montenegrin higher education and research institutions in January 2022. Montenegro has 
initiated the creation of a feasibility study of a national open science repository, which will 
provide necessary elements to form the open science repository and join the European Open 
Science Cloud.  
The latest available statistics from 2019 indicated that research and development (R&D) 
funding stood at 0.36 % of GDP in 2019 (0.50% in 2018), with an investment share of 0.12 % 
provided by the private sector. An increased budget in this area remains very much needed to 
support the country’s economic recovery, while helping address the issue of brain drain of 
researchers and young people.  
The new Strategy for Scientific Research Activities (2022-2026), which will define 
instruments aimed at increasing the number of researchers, is not yet in place. The working 
group tasked with its development was established on 25 January 2022. One of the priorities 
of the future strategy will be making stronger connection between science and economy, 
further linking scientific research and innovation activities. Cooperation between the 
academic and business sectors is promoted through the implementation of programmes 
between the Minister of Science and Technological Development, the Ministry of Education, 
Culture and Sports and the Ministry of Economic Development in the field of innovation. A 
total of 13 projects supported through the EU-funded Collaborative grant scheme for 
innovative project ideas are on-going and should be completed by Q4 2022. 
Montenegro continues to implement the Smart Specialisation Strategy (S3), in line with its 
national legislation and the Commission’s technical recommendations, through adoption of 
the Operational Programme for the Implementation of the Smart Specialization Strategy 
2021-2024. This covers the four S3 strategic priority areas: agriculture, energy, health and 
tourism. The Council for Innovation and Smart Specialisation, as the government 
management body for implementing and monitoring the S3 process, was established in June 
2021 and held its first session in December 2021. The inter-institutional S3 working group 
has been established under the lead of the national S3 coordinator. Following the 
organizational changes in the government of Montenegro, harmonization of the structure of 


===== PAGE 103 =====
 
102 
 
the Council for Innovation and Smart Specialization has been initiated in June 2022. It is 
established with an aim to coordinate and make use of the feedback of all relevant target 
groups in creating, implementing and monitoring the process of smart specialization. The 
changes in the institutional S3 Group are also ongoing. 
Further to its establishment in June 2021, the national Innovation Fund became operational at 
the beginning of 2022, with 7 employees and following the adoption of its 2022 work 
programme. It will support the implementation of innovation policy by funding innovation 
activities and technological development. First calls for support schemes (vouchers) financed 
from national budget were launched in early 2022, with a total budget of EUR 100.000. The 
development of an information and communication technology (ICT) cluster has not yet been 
finalised. The fully equipped and operational laboratories at the innovation and 
entrepreneurship centre ‘Tehnopolis’ are providing support to businesses, based on 
innovative ideas and technologies. Following delays, the construction works on the Science 
and Technology Park (STP) in Podgorica are now progressing. Both the STP and Tehnopolis 
are directly involved in implementing certain measures and instruments defined by the S3. In 
March 2022, the Ministry of Economic Development and the University of Montenegro 
decided to establish a National Technology Transfer Office (TTO) within the STP in 
Podgorica. Montenegro’s status in the European Innovation Scoreboard (EIS) in 2021 was 
one of emerging innovator.  
The international agreement on Montenegro’s participation in Horizon Europe was signed in 
December 2021. A number of institutions have already negotiated and signed grant 
agreements. The participation of the scientific research community in the Cooperation in 
Science and Technology (COST) programme increased in 2021, and Montenegrin research 
teams participated in about 110 (still ongoing) actions during the previous year. In May 2022, 
COST Committee of senior officials confirmed the funding of 70 new COST actions that will 
officially start in the autumn of 2022. Research teams from Montenegro also participated as 
partners in 12 approved COST actions. The implementation of nine EUREKA projects 
continued in 2021.  
In November 2021, the country and the International Atomic Nuclear Agency adopted the 
Programme of technical cooperation 2022-2023. 
The implementation of the project establishing the Southeast Europe International Institute 
for Sustainable technologies (SEEIIST) for hadronic cancer therapy and research in the field 
of biomedicine using protons and heavier ions has continued. 
Podgorica was selected to participate in the EU Climate and Smart Cities mission by 2030, 
along with 100 cities from 27 EU Member States and as one of the 12 cities from countries 
associated to the Horizon Europe programme. 
Chapter 26: Education and culture  
The EU supports cooperation in education and culture through funding programmes and 
the coordination of Member State policy through the open method of coordination. The EU 
and the Member States must also prevent discrimination and ensure quality education for 
children of migrant workers, including those from disadvantaged backgrounds.  
Montenegro has a good level of preparation in this area. Some progress was made 
regarding the recommendation on inclusive education but for other recommendations much 
more effort is needed and thus, they remain valid. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ adopt a costed plan for wide ranging education reforms including inclusive education 


===== PAGE 104 =====
 
103 
 
and improving access to quality education at all education levels; 
→ implement the new strategy on early and pre-school education 2021-2025 to improve 
pre-school enrolment for all children; 
→ finalise then initiate the national Vocational Education and Training (VET) 
implementation plan 2022-2023 of the VET Strategy 2020-2024, as well as putting in 
place the evaluation mechanism of practical learning at VET and higher education 
levels. 
On education and training, the government adopted the strategy on early and pre-school 
education 2021-2025 with a related action plan 2021-2025, and the strategy for digitalization 
of the education system in Montenegro 2022-2027, with the action plan 2022-2023 in 
October and December 2021 respectively.  
According to the Economic Reform Programme of Montenegro, 2022-2024, spending on 
education was 4.3% of GDP in 2021. The preschool enrolment rate stood at 48.71% (male: 
49.09% and female: 48.30%) in 2020-2021, still well below the EU 95% target. This 
enrolment of students was however affected by the COVID-19 context. The number of 
children in preschool education returned to the 2019 level (72% of children aged 3-6), and the 
number of children with disabilities in both preschool and primary education increased by 
21% and 7%, Online schooling continued during the school year, and regular schooling 
restarted as of 1 September 2021 (with 30-minute classes) continuing the supporting 
measures on digital exclusion taken in the previous year, and taking into account that many 
children lacked internet access, Telekom of Montenegro provided internet coverage for 100 
branch units of primary schools (or 50% of total number of branch institutions) located in 
rural areas. This is the first phase of a broader initiative planned by the strategy for 
digitalization of education system, i.e. to make internet available in all schools in Montenegro 
and providing all children attending school with a possibility to use digital content. 
Furthermore, the government approved in December 2021 the Strategy for Digitalization of 
Education (2022 – 2027), which is fully aligned with the EU Digital Education Action Plan. 
Although an analysis of the education systems has been completed, Montenegro still does not 
have a qualitative, budgeted, multi-annual education strategy and plan for sustainable 
reforms. This would require broad discussions with all relevant stakeholders, including civil 
society taking in issues of youth with disabilities, minority groups, as well as a gender 
dimension focusing on the specific needs of girls and boys.   
The provision of additional free textbooks in primary schools, additional mentors and 
associates engaged at primary and secondary schools for Roma and Egyptian pupils 
continued. As in 2020, free transport was provided for 600 primary school students (again 
Roma and Egyptian) in Nikšić, Podgorica, Cetinje and Berane municipalities. Scholarships 
were provided for 172 Roma and Egyptian students at secondary and 12 at university-level. 
Montenegro has still to more closely align with the Poznan Declaration on Roma integration 
in order to fully implement the strategy for inclusive education 2019-2025. This strategy is 
being implemented through a range of actions, such as counselling for schools with integrated 
classes promotional activities for local communities, and trainings to schools’ management, 
teachers and professional staff. Teaching aids and IT equipment were ensured through an EU-
funded project. However, results on an EU-funded project aimed at improving access for 
persons with disabilities in eight schools were not yet finalised. 
The new strategy on early and preschool education was adopted in Q4 2021 and its 
implementation started including support to all pre-school institutions for conducting 
campaign on enrolment, capacity building of staff to implement the parenting programme, a 


===== PAGE 105 =====
 
104 
 
workshop on partnerships with Roma and Egyptian families. Regarding the Strategy on 
lifelong entrepreneurial learning (2020-2024) the report on the implementation of its 2021 
action plan is ready, as well as the action plan for 2022-2023 and their adoption is expected in 
the next government session. Montenegro has developed key competences, specifically those 
linked to STEM subjects (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) within an EU-
funded project dedicated to the integration of key competences at all levels of the education 
system. 
In the area of skills and vocational education and training (VET), and in line with the 
related action plan 2020-2021, 27 occupational standards, 27 professional qualification 
standards and ten standards of qualification levels of education were developed with EU 
funds.  A report on the implementation of the Action Plan 2020-2021 of the VET strategy 
2020-2024 is, however, not yet available nor is the action plan 2022-2023. Montenegro is 
committed to implement and monitor the 2015 Riga Conclusions on VET and participates 
regularly in the policy dialogue on VET reforms at EU and regional level. Montenegro has 
been following initiatives by Regional Cooperation Council (RCC) and Education Reform 
Initiative (ERI SEE). Regarding the Osnabrück Declaration 2021-2025 and commitments 
stemming from the declaration signature (commitments to the European Education and 
Training Area and the international dimension of VET), Montenegro has finalised the related 
National Implementation Plan. Montenegro organised dual education (the school year 
2021/2022) in 25 schools in 17 municipalities for around 600 students (17 educational 
programmes) with the involvement of 230 employers. According to the Ministry of 
Education, the report on dual education for 2020/2021 has been prepared, however it is not 
yet available. In cooperation with the European Training Foundation, the document on career 
development was drafted in 2021, and the Programme for lifelong career guidance and 
counselling 2021-2023 with the related action plan was developed in Q4 2021. In January 
2022, the annual plan for adult education for 2022 was adopted as part of the wider Adult 
Education Plan 2019-2022. 
The Ministry of Education, Science, Culture and Sports revised strategy for higher education 
to cover the period 2022-2026 and draft a new Law on Higher Education. However, their 
adoption is pending and tangible results are not yet in place. Developing a structured 
monitoring and evaluation of practical education in higher education programmes remains to 
be an area that requires specific attention.  
Montenegro benefits from the international dimension of the Erasmus+ programme. The 
ring-fenced support for the four Western Balkan countries not yet associated to the 
programme provided by IPA amounts to EUR 374 million for the 2021-2027 programme 
period. In 2021, Montenegro applied for two calls under the EU’s programme Erasmus+. 
While there is not information on the implementation of the Progress in International Reading 
Literacy Study (PISA) and the 2021 action plan and recommendations for improving 
education quality, Montenegro is still active in these processes.  
On culture, in December 2021 Montenegro signed an agreement with the European 
Commission for its participation in the EU Creative Europe 2021-2027 programme. 
Montenegro still needs to establish an overall management system to implement protection 
measures for the preservation of Kotor's (Boka Kotorska Bay) UNESCO World Heritage 
status. 
The newly formed Ministry of Youth and Sports is responsible for the new Strategy on Youth 
and while the previous strategy ended in 2020 as yet a new one has not yet been approved. As 
part of the Youth Law, 11 Administrators were appointed for youth centres but most lack 
institutional support and a budget for activities. Youth centres need to establish new Action 


===== PAGE 106 =====
 
105 
 
Plans but are dependent of the approval of the new Strategy on Youth. The National Youth 
Council, established in 2020, has representatives from the Montenegrin Youth Network and 
the Network, with 46 members’ organizations, is actively participating in the EU Youth 
dialogue on unemployment, organized by the Regional Cooperation Council (RCC) and 
Europe House. The outcomes of the Youth dialogue should also be incorporated into the 
Youth Guarantee which is under development. 
Chapter 29: Customs union  
All Member States are part of the EU customs union and follow the same customs rules and 
procedures. This requires legislative alignment, adequate implementing and enforcement 
capacity, and access to the common computerised customs systems.  
Montenegro is moderately prepared for the customs union. It made limited progress, 
slowly advancing preparations for accession to the Convention on common transit 
procedure, and implementing actions foreseen in the trade facilitation strategy 2018¬-
2022, in limited fulfilment of last year's recommendations. The reorganisation of the 
customs administration in April 2021 resulted in numerous changes on the managerial 
positions and brought staff recruitment to a standstill. In consequence, the reforms slowed 
down and many IT projects, co-financed by the EU, were delayed. Significant challenges 
remain in reducing illicit tobacco trade through the port of Bar. Last year’s 
recommendations remain therefore valid. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ establish an EU-compatible computerised transit system (NCTS) and finalise 
accession to the Convention on a common transit procedure; 
→ continue implementing trade facilitation measures to reduce administrative 
inefficiencies and the time needed for customs clearance;  
→ ensure sufficient staffing levels for timely and efficient implementation of numerous 
IT development projects. 
On customs legislation, the new Customs Code, aligned with the Union Customs Code, was 
adopted in July 2022, though its implementation will start in February 2023. In December 
2021, the government adopted an action plan to address last year’s recommendations. The 
document indicates that the implementation of the Customs Code and the ratification of the 
Law on accession to the Convention on common transit procedure and the Convention on 
trade facilitation in goods should be finalised in the third quarter of 2022. The legislation on 
the control of production and trade of drug precursors is expected to be adopted at the same 
time.  
Montenegro is implementing the Regional Convention on Pan-Euro-Mediterranean (PEM) 
preferential rules of origin. The ratification procedure to adopt PEM transitional rules of 
origin is ongoing. In the framework of the Authorised Economic Operators (AEO) 
programme, one more authorisation was issued, bringing the number of AEOs in the country 
to three. In December 2021, the government adopted implementing legislation on the customs 
tariff for 2022.  
Further alignment of legislation on customs security, together with adoption of implementing 
legislation on the export control of cultural goods, remain pending. Fees continue to be 
charged to lorries in inland customs terminals located in privately owned facilities, which is 
not in line with the EU acquis.  


===== PAGE 107 =====
 
106 
 
On administrative and operational capacity, the establishment of the Revenue and 
Customs Administration (RCA) in April 2021 was accompanied by numerous changes in 
managerial positions and a new systematisation of jobs. Very few recruitments took place. 
Due to reorganisation, staff shortages and the COVID-19 pandemic, work on the 
implementation of the New Computerised Transit System (NCTS) and accession to the 
common transit convention, as well as on other EU-related and co-financed projects, slowed 
down. Consequently, plans had to be adjusted and the deadlines for projects extended.  
The accreditation process for the customs laboratory is still pending. Draft instruction for 
writing-off customs debt were prepared, but would need to be revised again, following the 
adoption of the new Customs Code. Work in the areas of the customs decision system and 
Integrated Tariff Management System started in December 2021 and February 2022, 
respectively, with EU support.  
In 2021, the gross collection of customs revenues amounted to approximately EUR 803 
million, which is 19.7% more than in 2020. The trend continued in 2022, with customs 
revenues reaching EUR 466 million by the end of June 2022, 39% above the amounts 
collected in the same period of 2021.    
As concerns the fight against illicit tobacco trade, in July 2021 the government adopted a 
decision on banning the storage of tobacco products in the free zone of the port of Bar. 
However, contracts with free zone users storing cigarettes were to expire only in June 2022. 
In December 2021, a new government decision finally prohibited the placement of tobacco 
products in the free zone, except for transhipment. The RCA was tasked to perform the 
inventory of the tobacco stock and set deadlines to ship them out of the free zone. In parallel, 
the RCA was requested to introduce and keep electronic records for all movements of goods 
in the free zone. Before the system became operational in February 2022, a series of cigarette 
thefts revealed important gaps in the free zone’s security, criminal activity and alleged 
collusion of certain customs officers. In May and June 2022, the RCA and police seized large 
quantities of cigarettes without excise stamps. They should be gradually destroyed, in 
accordance with Montenegro’s obligations under WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco 
Control and the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products. 
The decision on the storage prohibition, implementation of the Cargo Targeting System, 
enabling pre-arrival risk analysis of containers in the Port of Bar, and the use of electronic 
record keeping of containers should contribute to the reduction of illicit tobacco trade through 
the port of Bar. However, gaps in the system remain and need to be addressed and work on a 
track and trace system for cigarettes should continue. 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY  
This cluster covers chapters 14-transport policy, 15-energy, 21-trans-European networks and 
27-environment and climate change. All four chapters are open, with closing benchmarks that 
remain to be fulfilled in each chapter. This cluster and the reforms concerned have significant 
links to Montenegro’s Economic Reform Programme, the Commission’s Economic and 
Investment Plan and the Green Agenda for the Western Balkans endorsed by Montenegro. 
Some progress was achieved on creating a functioning day-ahead energy market and on 
preparing for the membership in the Paris Memorandum of Understanding on port state 
control. There was limited progress on implementing the Transport Development Strategy 
and on its review; on water management and by improved climate change reporting. 
In the coming period, Montenegro is invited to focus on the following areas: complete key 
recommended reforms in the transport area, in particular on rail transport and on the review 
of Transport Development Strategy; adopt and implement the law on security of supply of oil 


===== PAGE 108 =====
 
107 
 
products and set –up the functioning day-ahead energy market; strengthen the administrative 
capacities to prepare for trans-European networks in the areas of transport, 
telecommunications and energy; considerably step up ambitions towards a green transition 
and step up its efforts on implementation and enforcement, in particular on waste 
management, water quality, nature protection and climate change. 
Chapter 14: Transport policy  
The EU has common rules for technical and safety standards, security, social standards, 
state aid and market liberalisation in road transport, railways, inland waterways, combined 
transport, aviation and maritime transport. 
Montenegro is moderately prepared/has a good level of preparation in the area of 
transport policy. There was some progress in the reporting period on key reforms, mainly 
on the strategic framework for implementation of intelligent transport systems (ITS) in the 
field of road transport and accession to the Paris Memorandum of Understanding on port 
state control. Other recommendations from the last year’s report remain valid.  
In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ achieve full membership in the Paris Memorandum of Understanding on port state 
control; 
→ adopt a new railway law and ensure the functional, decision-making and operational 
independence and appropriate staffing of the railway regulatory body and the railway 
safety authority;  
→ start implementing intelligent transport systems (ITS) on its core road network and lay 
down the strategic ITS framework for the rail and maritime networks. 
On general transport, in December 2021 the government adopted a roadmap to fulfil 
conditions for the provisional closure of negotiations in chapter 14. Implementation of the 
country’s transport development strategy continued, albeit with late adoption of the action 
plan for 2021-2022 in December 2021. Alignment of the national strategy with the 
Sustainable and Smart Mobility Strategy for the Western Balkans of the Transport 
Community needs to be prioritised. The Commission for Investigation of Accidents in 
Maritime, Rail and Air Transport increased its administrative capacity, however its adequate 
financing is yet to be secured. There was no progress on alignment with the EU acquis 
concerning public service obligations, procedures and criteria for the award of public service 
contracts in road, rail and maritime transport. 
On road transport, in December 2021, the government adopted a four-year programme 
(2022-2026) for development and deployment of ITS in the field of road transport. Capacities 
and resources for the implementation of the programme need to be allocated. Implementing 
legislation in the area of minimum safety requirements for tunnels, road safety audits and 
interoperability of electronic road toll systems provided some further alignment with the EU 
acquis. There was no progress on alignment for other pending legal acts.  
The 2020-2022 programme for road safety improvement is in its final year of 
implementation. However, statistics show no improvement on fatal and serious road traffic 
accidents. Montenegro should urgently develop a long-term road safety strategy and action 
plans, in line with the EU road safety policy framework 2021-2030. It should also step up 
efforts to develop a database for road safety crashes and improve the data quality. A mid-term 
2022-2026 road maintenance and rehabilitation programme is yet to be prepared.  


===== PAGE 109 =====
 
108 
 
On rail transport, there was no progress on alignment with the EU acquis, including on the 
adoption of the new railway law, the methodology for track access charges, full market 
opening for passenger and freight transport services. The management of public service 
contracts for rail transport and compliance with passengers’ rights remain a concern. In 
November 2021, the government endorsed a new national programme for the rehabilitation 
and maintenance of the railway infrastructure for 2021-2023. However, sustainable and 
rationalised railway infrastructure rehabilitation and multi-annual maintenance plans need to 
be urgently developed. Montenegro should strive to address the key challenges through 
effective implementation of the Transport Community rail action plan.  
On maritime transport, several implementing acts were adopted on the inspection of foreign 
ships. In January 2022, Montenegro started implementing the National Maritime Single 
Window and initiated an upgrade and extension of the vessel traffic monitoring and 
information system. Montenegro is yet to align with the EU acquis on ports and to adopt 
legislation based on Port Services Regulation. Montenegro’s fulfilment of the conditions for 
full membership to the Paris Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control is 
ongoing. 
On the inland waterway transport in Montenegro, no progress was made on the alignment 
with relevant EU acquis.  
On aviation, several implementing acts on air safety and air traffic operations were adopted. 
Following the establishment of a new national airline company “To Montenegro” in January 
2021, the government gradually increased its founding capital. In December 2021, the 
parliament adopted the law on termination of the law on investments in consolidation and 
development of the former national airline, “Montenegro Airlines”. The certification of 
airports in Podgorica and Tivat is still not completed. In November 2021, the government 
adopted a new programme for air transport facilitation. 
Concerning combined transport, a comprehensive feasibility study and business plan is 
under preparation for the establishment of the port of Bar as a sustainable multimodal 
platform. It will provide the necessary baseline for functional requirements, technical 
specifications and a conceptual design of the selected option for logistic areas and sites. The 
legislation on combined freight transport from 2014 remains the main legal framework in this 
sector. 
Chapter 15: Energy  
EU energy policy covers energy supply, infrastructure, the internal energy market, 
consumers, renewable energy, energy efficiency, nuclear energy and nuclear safety and 
radiation protection. 
Montenegro has reached a good level of preparation in this area. Some progress was 
made in the reporting period, mainly on preparatory steps towards the creation of a day-
ahead energy market and on moving to market-based schemes for renewable energy 
production. Last year’s recommendations were thus partially addressed.  
In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular:  
→ start operating a functioning day-ahead electricity market and couple with 
neighbouring markets, including Italy;  
→ accelerate the move to market-based support schemes for renewable energy 
production based on streamlined permitting and connection procedures;  
→ adopt the law on security of supply of oil products and set up the stockholding body 


===== PAGE 110 =====
 
109 
 
for the mandatory oil reserves. 
In the area of security of supply, Montenegro has an energy development strategy up to 
2030. The government adopted the energy balance for 2022. Activities continued in the 
context of the development of the National Energy and Climate Plan. No progress was made 
on the revision of the action plan on compulsory strategic reserves of oil and petroleum 
products, the adoption of the law on security of supply of oil products and the setup of a 
central body for strategic oil reserves. Oil stocks still remain very low. However, Montenegro 
plans to ensure the existence of strategic oil stock reserves by 1 January 2023 thanks to 
introduction of stock keeping obligations on importers of petroleum products. Montenegro 
does not import oil from Russia and does not have any gas infrastructure, so the impact of the 
Russian war on Ukraine on the country’s energy security remains limited.  
Work on electricity transmission interconnections between Montenegro and Serbia continued. 
The ecological reconstruction of the thermal power plant Plevlja started at the end of April 
2022, with a three-year delay. The completion of this project is expected in October 2024. 
Montenegro’s government maintains that following the reconstruction, the plant will be 
operating within the emission limits set by the large combustion plants directive.   
There was no noticeable progress on the administrative capacity of the national authorities, 
which needs to be strengthened.  
Concerning the internal energy market, the first steps towards achieving a competitive day-
ahead electricity market have been implemented. A consortium between the European Power 
Exchange (EPEX SPOT) and the Slovenian BSP South Pool won the tender and signed a 
service agreement for the implementation of the day-ahead market. Work progresses, 
including negotiations on coupling the market with neighbouring countries. In November 
2021, the Energy and Water Regulatory Agency of Montenegro approved new rules on long-
term, daily and intraday capacity allocation for the border between Serbia and Montenegro. 
The law on surveillance of wholesale electricity and gas market, aligned with the REMIT 
Regulation, entered into force in January 2022. 
On hydrocarbons, national legislation is aligned with the hydrocarbons licensing directive. 
The law on safety measures in offshore exploration and production of hydrocarbons is 
pending adoption by the parliament. Montenegro has so far awarded two concession contracts 
for offshore hydrocarbon exploration and production in 2016 and 2017. The exploration 
period for one concessionaire has been extended to September 2022. In accordance with the 
concession agreement, the second concessionaire is obliged to find a new partner, to be 
approved by the government to receive a further extension of the exploration rights. It 
remains under Montenegro’s remit to ensure compliance of the concession holders with 
environmental liability rules and rule of law standards through contractual obligations. The 
construction of Montenegro's section of the Ionian-Adriatic Gas Pipeline (IAP) has 
cumulated a serious delay. Work on the preliminary design of this section was completed in 
October 2021, while a public consultation on the environmental and social impact assessment 
documentation is yet to be implemented. The advancement of the project depends on the 
ability of the government to conclude appropriate public consultations and reach an 
agreement with concerned municipalities on the preferred alignment.  
In the area of renewable energy, 43.8 % of gross final consumption of energy came from 
renewable sources in 2020, which exceeded the 33% target to be achieved by 2020 under 
Montenegro’s national action plan. In July 2021, the government decided to stop previous 
schemes providing price subsidies for electricity produced from renewable sources and 
highly efficient cogeneration. In March 2022, the government granted a concession for the 


===== PAGE 111 =====
 
110 
 
construction, maintenance and use of the Komarnica hydropower plant to the national energy 
company, EPCG. The government also adopted decisions on terminating concession 
agreements for constructing several small hydropower plants. Progress has been made in the 
development of spatial plans and environmental impact assessments for the implementation 
of wind farms and solar power plants. It remains essential that the development of new 
renewable energy projects, particularly on hydropower, are carried out in conformity with the 
EU acquis on concessions, State aid and the environment. 
In the area of energy efficiency, some progress was made in alignment with the EU acquis, 
with the adoption of implementing legislation on requirements for eco-design and energy 
efficiency labelling of energy-related products. The National Energy and Climate Plan 
(NECP), once adopted, will replace the existing energy efficiency action plan as the key 
planning document in the area of energy efficiency. The Ministry of Capital Investments 
continued coordinating several programmes on energy efficiency improvement for public and 
private households. In October 2021, the “Energy Efficient Home” pilot programme opened 
to citizens the opportunity of interest-free loans for implementing energy efficiency measures 
in households. The energy efficiency fund has not been established yet. There have been no 
developments in improving statistical data collection and monitoring the implementation of 
the energy efficiency action plan. 
Regarding nuclear energy, nuclear safety and radiation, Montenegro does not have a 
nuclear industry, research reactor or any other facility producing radioactive materials and 
national legislation prohibits the construction of nuclear facilities. The country continues to 
cooperate in several regional initiatives for the early exchange of information in the event of 
radiological emergency (ECURIE). However, it is yet to join the European Radiological Data 
Exchange Platform and currently has no intention to participate in the Capital and Advisory 
Committee of the Euratom Supply Agency. 
Chapter 21: Trans-European networks 
The EU promotes trans-European networks in transport, telecommunications and energy to 
strengthen the internal market and contribute to growth and employment. 
Montenegro remains moderately prepared /has a good level of preparation in the area of 
trans-European networks. There was limited progress on the implementation of the 
Transport Development Strategy, primarily on the development of rail projects. Last year’s 
recommendations remain valid.  
In the coming year Montenegro should in particular: 
→ review the Transport Development Strategy to align it with the Strategy for Sustainable 
and Smart Mobility in the Western Balkans, confirming a shift towards greener 
transport modes; 
→ revise institutional policies to improve the efficiency of managing infrastructure 
projects and increase the funding absorption capacities;  
→ ensure that capacitated staff is retained or hired for managing infrastructure projects in 
the areas of transport, telecommunications and energy.  
 
In December 2021 the government adopted a roadmap to fulfil conditions for the provisional 
closure of negotiations in chapter 21. 
On transport networks, Montenegro continued to actively participate in the work of the 
Transport Community Treaty (TCT). In December 2021, the government adopted the 2021-


===== PAGE 112 =====
 
111 
 
2022 action plan for the Transport Development Strategy. The strategy needs to be reviewed 
in 2022, to align it with the TCT obligations, notably the Strategy for Sustainable and Smart 
Mobility in the Western Balkans. The revision will bring about a shift towards greener and 
more sustainable modes of transport, in line with the current EU policies. The long-awaited 
law on railways is expected to clearly define responsibilities of railway regulatory body and 
operational implementing agencies. Montenegro is a member of the Western Balkans Road 
Safety Observatory, established in July 2021.  
In December 2021, the government adopted a new single project pipeline (SPP) document, 
which includes numerous projects in the areas of energy and transport. However, the cost 
estimates and maturity statements on transport projects were not updated and reflect the data 
and prices from 2017. In view of the increases in construction costs, the pipeline of EUR 3.7 
billion investments in transport projects would need to be evaluated with caution. The impact 
of such plans on the country’s budget and fiscal space is yet to be assessed. Moreover, 
Montenegro needs to change its institutional approach to improve the efficiency of managing 
infrastructure projects, in order to increase its funding absorption capacities.  
On infrastructure development, several priority road projects were suffering delays. Works 
on the priority section of Bar-Boljare highway (Smokovac – Matesevo) continued. The 
section was finally opened to traffic in July 2022, with a three-year delay. The applicable toll 
rate for passenger vehicles on the completed section of the highway is 8 cents per km, 60% 
above the rate recommended by the EU-financed feasibility study and cost-benefit analysis 
for the entire Bar-Boljare highway (5 cents). The study, which includes recommendations on 
construction standards, toll rates and means of financing for the remaining sections, should be 
adopted in 2022. The preliminary design work on Budva bypass section of the Adriatic-
Ionian expressway progressed very slowly, hampered by Montenegro’s legislation on 
preliminary design requirements for complex infrastructure, which leads to excessive design 
costs and causes delays. As a result, the European Commission cancelled the investment 
grant of EUR 41.2 million, inviting for re-application should project maturity be attained. 
On the rail network, works on different rail projects continued with EU funding, including on 
the upgrading of the Bar-Vrbnica railway and a feasibility study on Podgorica-Tuzi-Albania 
border railway.  
On energy networks, progress continued in interconnecting the electricity systems of Serbia, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Italy and Montenegro. The construction of Montenegro's section of 
the Ionian-Adriatic Gas Pipeline (IAP) has so far cumulated a serious delay. Work on the 
preliminary design of this section was completed in October 2021, while a public 
consultation on the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) documentation is 
yet to be implemented. The advancement of the project is very much depending on the ability 
of the Government to instigate appropriate public consultations and reach an agreement with 
concerned municipalities on the preferred alignment.   
Overall, infrastructure investments need to comply fully with the EU standards on public 
procurement, State aid and environmental impact assessment. New investments need to 
address changing strategic priorities, decarbonisation, digitalisation and resilience of 
transport and energy networks, all with prior cost-benefit analyses carried out in line with EU 
best practice.  
 Montenegro is yet to fully align its legislation with the TEN-T and TEN-E EU acquis. A 
legislative gap analysis was prepared. 
Chapter 27: Environment and climate change 


===== PAGE 113 =====
 
112 
 
The EU promotes strong climate action, sustainable development and protection of the 
environment. EU law contains provisions addressing climate change, water and air quality, 
waste management, nature protection, industrial pollution, chemicals, noise and civil 
prothection. 
Montenegro has some level of preparation in this area. Limited progress was made in 
further aligning with the EU acquis, on water, nature protection and climate change. 
Significant efforts are still needed on implementation and enforcement, in particular on 
waste management, water quality, nature protection and climate change. Montenegro 
should considerably step up its ambitions towards a green transition. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ intensify implementation and enforcement work for the fulfilment of the closing 
benchmarks in the Chapter 27, in particular in the water, nature protection, and 
climate change sectors;  
→ finalise the waste management law and the national waste management plan;  
→ finalise, adopt and start implementing the national energy and climate plan in a 
transparent manner, in line with the EU’s 2050 zero emission target and the Green 
Agenda for the Western Balkans. 
Environment  
On horizontal legislation, in October 2021, the government adopted the first semi-annual 
report on the implementation of the action plan for the fulfilment of the closing benchmarks 
in Chapter 27. In December 2021, the government adopted the financial assessment of the 
action plan for the fulfilment of the closing benchmarks in Chapter 27, covering 2021-2025, 
indicating financial needs amounting to nearly EUR 483 million. In the reporting period, 
Montenegro completed five strategic environmental assessments (SEA) and 53 
environmental impact assessments (EIA). On environmental crime, in the reporting period, 
101 new cases were registered and 46 cases were legally resolved. The lack of sufficient 
administrative capacities at central and local level and inspection bodies, insufficient inter-
institutional coordination and lack of a sustainable financial framework remain challenges to 
be urgently addressed. The position of the head of the working group for Chapter 27 remains 
to be filled.  
As regards air quality, in October 2021, the government adopted the decree on emission 
limit values from combustion plants and the method of calculating emission limit values for 
plants using several types of fuel. As in the previous reporting period, the adoption of the 
strategy on air quality management for the period 2021-2029, as well as of the action plan 
2021-2022, remain pending.   
In the area of waste management, alignment remains partial. Considerable efforts on 
strategic planning and investments are needed to implement the national strategy for waste 
management until 2030. Work on the law on waste management continued during the 
reporting period. A new national waste management plan remains to be drafted. Over the 
reporting period, recycling yards with a sorting plant were built in the municipalities of Plav 
and Petnjica. However, infrastructure for separate waste collection and recycling remains to 
be established in most of the country’s territory and illegal and temporary waste disposal to 
be resolved. A feasibility study for the construction of a regional waste management centre in 
Bijelo Polje has been finalised. It will serve all municipalities in the northern part of 
Montenegro. 


===== PAGE 114 =====
 
113 
 
Alignment on water quality remains limited. In March 2022, the government adopted the 
water management plans for the Danube and Adriatic basins. Significant efforts are still 
needed to implement the water quality acquis. In order to implement the Floods Directive, an 
analysis of the existing flood protection infrastructure has been done and a preliminary risk 
assessment has been carried out, while the development of maps of flood hazards and flood 
risks started. Further work for alignment with the acquis was pursued as concerns water 
intended for human consumption and for implementing the bathing water directive.   
In the area of nature protection, Montenegro is partially aligned with the EU acquis. In the 
last quarter of 2021 the government declared the two marine nature parks "Katič" and "Stari 
Ulcinj" as protected areas. Following the July 2021 decision of the government’s 
privatisation council on Ulcinj Salina land as state-owned, the adoption of the privatisation 
council decision by the Government is pending. Since December 2021, an EU expert 
supports further work to develop the management model for the national park Ulcinj Salina. 
Activities regarding Natura 2000 have continued over reporting period, funded by the 
national budget. Recommendations of the Bern Convention related to Skadar Lake still need 
to be addressed. Montenegro should use support provided to establish its Emerald network 
based on Natura 2000 mapping information. Following Bar-Boljare highway construction 
negative impact, Tara river remediation work has been completed for the first location Uvač, 
in line with the remediation plan.  
On industrial pollution control and risk management, Montenegro remains partially 
aligned with the EU acquis. Further implementing legislation was adopted to the law on 
industrial emissions. Activities continued in the field of industrial waste management. 
Reconstruction of the Pljevlja coal power plant to meet EU emission standards started in 
April 2022. Its completion is expected in more than two years.  
On chemicals, the government adopted implementation reports as concerns the Stockholm 
Convention 2019-2023 and the Minamata Convention, jointly with the action plan 2022-2023 
and the Minamata initial assessment. A memorandum of cooperation among different 
national stakeholders was signed to improve inter-institutional cooperation in the area of 
chemicals.  
On noise, the capital city of Podgorica, in line with strategic documents in the field of 
environmental noise protection, has started the implementation of noise monitoring programs 
at 11 resident locations. 
On civil protection, Montenegro has been a member of the Union Civil Protection 
Mechanism since April 2015. In December 2021, the work on the development of the 
National Risk Assessment for all types of hazards affecting Montenegro was completed, as 
part of a project funded by the EC. The document was acknowledged through the adoption by 
the government of Montenegro. The necessary communication equipment (sTESTA) is 
installed in the premises of the Police Directorate. In view of this Montenegro is fulfilling the 
pre-requisite to connect to the Common Emergency Communication and Information system, 
commonly referred to as CECIS. 
Climate change 
Montenegro’s level of alignment on climate change remains limited. Montenegro has a 
climate change strategy in place, but has to intensify its work to ensure consistency with the 
EU 2030 climate and energy policy framework. It also needs to ensure that its strategy is 
integrated into all relevant sectoral policies and strategies. Montenegro needs to enhance its 
administrative capacity to enable implementation and enforcement of the acquis. 
Considerable work is still required to align with the EU acquis, such as to incorporate 


===== PAGE 115 =====
 
114 
 
remaining elements of the EU Emissions Trading System (ETS), the Effort Sharing 
Regulation and the Governance Regulation. In December 2021, the government adopted the 
third biennial update report on climate change of Montenegro. The report has been finalised 
with revised calculations of greenhouse gas emissions for the period 1990-2019, in line with 
the new methodology of the 2006 IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Montenegro has been granted World Bank support in order to achieve carbon pricing 
readiness through the Market Implementation Partnership (PMI) program. Montenegro took 
initial steps for the development of its low carbon development strategy. The work on the 
development of the national energy and climate plan continued, finalisation expected by mid-
2024. Montenegro took part in the conference of the UN Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (COP26) in late 2021. In March 2022, the government adopted the second report on 
the implementation of the national strategy for climate change. 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION  
This cluster covers chapters 11-agriculture and rural development, 12-food safety, veterinary 
and phystosanitary policy, 13-fisheries, 22-regional policy & coordination of structural 
instruments, and 33-financial & budgetary provisions All five chapters are open, with closing 
benchmarks that remain to be fulfilled in each chapter. This cluster comprises policies linked 
to European structural funds, requiring particular preparation for developing the capacities to 
assume responsibilities of a future Member State.  
Progress was achieved in different areas e.g. in agriculture, food and fisheries through further 
support for agricultural establishments and rural food companies to align with the EU 
standards and in implementing IPARD. On financial and budgetary provisions, progress was 
achieved through improved coordination and management of own resources. 
In the coming period, Montenegro is invited to focus on the following areas: use to the best 
possible extent the remaining budget under IPARD II programme to use to the highest step 
up the implementation of the IPARD programme and to finalise the national strategies on 
agriculture and rural development as well as on fisheries for the 2022-2027 period; to 
continue upgrading food establishments and further strengthen administrative capacity in 
particular on food safety controls and fisheries; to update the action plan for meeting EU 
cohesion policy requirements while strengthening capacities to manage IPA programmes; to 
further align the institutional framework and rules of administration for the own resources 
system.   
Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development 
The common agricultural policy supports farmers and rural development. This requires 
strong management and control systems. There are also common EU rules for quality policy 
and organic farming. 
Montenegro remains moderately prepared in the area of agriculture and rural development. 
Some progress was achieved on last year’s recommendations, mainly regarding the 
instrument for pre-accession assistance for rural development programmes (IPARD II and 
III) through further calls for applications, request for entrustment for the ‘Technical 
assistance’ measure and for adoption of the IPARD III (2021-2027) programme, as well as 
strengthening of the capacity of the IPARD agency. The implementation of the action plan on 
EU acquis alignment and the new sector strategy development was limited. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ use to the best possible extent the remaining budget under IPARD II programme, seek a 
rollover entrustment for the already entrusted measures to IPARD III (2021-2027) 


===== PAGE 116 =====
 
115 
 
programme and work on completing the entrustment of the measures ‘Farm 
diversification and business development’ and ‘Technical assistance’; 
→ continue to implement the action plan for alignment with the EU acquis on agriculture 
and rural development, and adopt the strategy for agriculture and rural development 
2022-2028. 
On horizontal issues, drafting of the 2022-2028 strategy for agriculture and rural 
development started. The action plan for the EU acquis alignment was updated to cover the 
period without a strategy and calls for accelerated implementation. Progress still needs to be 
achieved by fully decoupling direct payment measures from production while linking 
payments to cross-compliance requirements. 
Setting up of the integrated administration and control system (IACS) needs to be speeded 
up. Some more agricultural plots and holdings were registered in the land parcel 
identification system (LPIS) which remains to be rolled out to the whole territory. There was 
good progress for the farm accountancy data network (FADN) through development of 
software and training. Farm advisory services remain to be strengthened. 
On common market organisation (CMO), implementation of the Action plan for CMO 
alignment remains to be stepped up. 
The Law on amendments to the Law on olive growing and olive oil, which will allow 
strengthening of the inspections and improving the quality of the olive oil, is currently with 
the Parliament.  
A new draft law on spirit drinks has been elaborated, taking into account Regulation (EU) 
2019/787. It was adopted by the government in July 2022.  
On rural development, altogether nine IPARD calls under the IPARD II programme were 
realised in total (3 new calls in the reporting period), for the measures ‘Investments in 
physical assets of agricultural holdings', ‘Investments in physical assets concerning 
processing and marketing of agricultural and fishery products’ and ‘Farm diversification and 
businesses development'. The IPARD measure ‘Technical assistance’ was submitted for 
entrustment in February 2022. Slow implementation led to the first de-commitment of funds 
after the end of the financial year 2021 and there is a considerable risk of further loss of 
IPARD funding. Therefore, stronger efforts are needed to fully absorb the funds in 2022 and 
2023. Montenegro’s IPARD III programme was approved by the European Commission in 
June 2022. Strengthening of the administrative capacity of the IPARD Agency in 2022 was 
supported with an amendment of the Systematization Act of the MAFWM, stipulating 
additional 25 posts for the IPARD activities. 
On quality policy, efforts continue to develop this policy area. All recommendations of the 
EU Peer Review Mission in November 2019 must be followed up. 
On organic farming, the potential for further development and expansion of the sector 
remains to be supported. The law on organic production, to align with the EU acquis, is being 
drafted.  
Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy 
EU hygiene rules for foodstuff production ensure a high level of food safety. Animal health 
and welfare and the safety of food of animal origin are safeguarded together with the quality 
of seed, the plant protection material, the protection against harmful organisms and animal 
nutrition.  
Montenegro remains moderately prepared on this chapter. Good progress was made on 


===== PAGE 117 =====
 
116 
 
previous year’s recommendations by implementing the national strategy for aligning with 
and implementing the EU acquis and in the upgrading of establishments. Administrative 
capacities and disease surveillance should be stepped up. 
In the coming year Montenegro should in particular: 
→ continue to implement and update the revised strategy for aligning with and 
implementing the EU acquis; 
→ further increase the share of food establishments compliant with EU standards; 
→ step up the strengthening of administrative capacity and infrastructures, in particular 
on food safety controls, and implement robust disease surveillance and vaccination, as 
applicable. 
On general food safety, the revised strategy for aligning with and implementing the EU 
acquis, and the specific action plan for classical swine fever were implemented on schedule 
and further implementing legislation was adopted. The 2021 programme for food and feed 
safety measures was implemented and the programme for 2022 was adopted and it is in 
implementation.  
On veterinary policy, the programme of mandatory animal health protection measures for 
2021 was implemented. The programme for 2022 was adopted and it is being implemented. 
Surveillance programmes were implemented for bluetongue disease and classical swine 
fever, where one sample showed presence of bluetongue virus genome, but vector 
surveillance showed none. Montenegro has resumed vaccination against rabies with EU 
support as of spring 2022 and until autumn 2023. Taking full ownership, Montenegro should 
transition to using its own means for future campaigns in line with relevant EU acquis 
obligations and should urgently set up and implement robust disease surveillance. 
Strengthening of regional alliances in the fight against cross-border animal diseases was 
agreed at the forum of directors of veterinary services of the Western Balkans. 
The first case of Avian influenza was detected in Montenegro on April 6 2022 in a deceased 
pelican, followed by others. Measures are put in place to control the disease in line with the 
relevant national legislation, and the recommendations and standards of relevant international 
organisations. 
Regarding African swine fever, there are no reported cases of the disease in Montenegro so 
far. Montenegro has been closely monitoring the situation and responding with appropriate 
measures, in line with the relevant legislation. The government adopted a programme for the 
control of the dog population in Montenegro in July 2021.  
On placing on the market of food, feed and animal by-products, the upgrading of food 
establishments continued, with now more than 50% compliance. The total number of 
establishments concerned decreased from 156 to 133 since 2015/2016. There are now 19 
facilities licensed to export to the EU. The National Program for the improvement of 
establishments dealing with products of animal origin and of establishments dealing with 
animal by-products was amended in December 2021.  
Montenegro continued to implement the national programme for improving raw milk quality 
and handling non-compliant milk. Increased digital data exchange is expected according to 
plan.  
The programme of food and feed safety measures for 2021 was implemented and the 
programme for 2022 was adopted. The programme of phytosanitary measures for 2021 was 
implemented and the programme for 2022 was adopted. Additional implementing legislation 


===== PAGE 118 =====
 
117 
 
concerning the phytosanitary sector was adopted. The National plan for sustainable use of 
pesticides for the period from 2021 to 2026 was also adopted and is currently being 
implemented. Planning for the construction of the National Reference Phytosanitary 
Laboratory advanced.  
On genetically modified organisms, the 2021 programme for genetically modified food and 
feed monitoring was implemented and the programme for 2022 was adopted and it is being 
implemented. 
Chapter 13: Fisheries  
The common fisheries policy lays down rules on fisheries management, protects living 
resources of the sea and limits the environmental impact of fisheries. This includes setting 
catch quotas, managing fleet capacity, rules on markets and aquaculture and support for 
fisheries and coastal communities.  
Montenegro has some level of preparation in this area. Limited progress was made on 
the recommendations of the last report, which remain valid. Montenegro continued to be a 
reliable partner in international fora. 
In the coming period, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ finalise its work in preparation of the new fisheries and aquaculture strategy with the 
action plan on aligning with and enforcing the EU acquis; 
→ continue to strengthen administrative, data collection, scientific advice, inspection and 
control capacities; 
→ continue, within the General Fisheries Commission for Mediterranean (GFCM), the 
implementation of the multiannual plan for demersal species in the Adriatic. 
Montenegro continued to implement its action plan on aligning with, implementing and 
enforcing the EU acquis under this chapter. The preparation of a fisheries sectorial study was 
finalised as the baseline for the new fisheries and aquaculture strategy 2023-2028 and its 
action plan. The Law on market organisation in fisheries and aquaculture and the Law on 
structural measures and State aid in fisheries and aquaculture are pending adoption by the 
Parliament. 
On resource management, the implementation of the activities within the annual data 
collection programme on Montenegrin fisheries for 2021 continued for the collection of 
commercial catch data, while COVID-19 prevented the collection of biological data. In the 
area of fleet management, following a public call on fleet modernisation, contracts were 
signed with 19 commercial fishers in December 2021. 
Regarding inspections and control, new functionalities are being added to the Fisheries 
Information System and an electronic licensing system for sport and recreational fishing is 
nearing completion. Dialogue with Albania continued to harmonise the management of the joint 
European eel resources and on control of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU). The 
port of Bar was designated as the port open for foreign fishing vessels. On data collection, 
efforts should mainly focus on scientific observers on board of fishing vessels and on recreational 
fisheries. There were no substantial developments on structural actions, market policy and 
State aid. 
At the international level, the Blue Land project, within INTERREG programmes, was 
successfully finalised. Montenegro also continued its cooperation with FAO AdriaMed, 
MedFish4Ever and the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean (GFCM). Here, 


===== PAGE 119 =====
 
118 
 
the implementation of the multiannual plan for demersal species in the Adriatic still suffers 
from the discontinuation of FAO AdriaMed support and the lack of national funding. 
Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments  
Regional policy is the EU’s main investment policy for sustainable and inclusive economic 
growth. Member States bear responsibility for implementation, which requires adequate 
administrative capacity and sound financial management of projects' design and execution. 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of regional policy and coordination of 
structural instruments. Limited progress was made over the reporting period, particularly 
in respect of key decisions yet to be reached on the institutional framework for preparing to 
future cohesion policy and on administrative capacity, which remains weak. 2021 
recommendations remain largely valid. 
In the coming year Montenegro should in particular:  
→ update the action plan and restart its implementation for meeting requirements deriving 
from EU cohesion policy;  
→ invest in increasing and consolidating the administrative capacity of central, regional 
and local bodies to more effectively safeguard IPA funds, and to put in place a structure 
to manage future cohesion policy funds. Strengthen capacities in procurement, 
management and monitoring of capital investments, while also reinforcing existing 
coordination mechanisms;  
→ create a credible pipeline of projects, along with a framework for strategic sectoral 
orientations and policies, while improving their preparation, procurement and 
implementation in line with EU and international standards. 
Regarding the legislative framework, some progress has been registered in the field of 
public procurement and competition law. The strategies for enhancing public procurement 
and public-private partnership policy in Montenegro for the period 2021-2025 and the 
accompanying action plan were adopted in October 2021. The preparation of amendments to 
the Public Procurement Law, which aim at the harmonization of legal provisions with the 
electronic public procurement system, have not been finalised. There was further 
harmonization in the field of competition with the adoption in December 2021 of the Law on 
Amendments to the Law on Protection of Competition, chiefly concerning the manner and 
requirements for selection of the Council of Agency for the Protection of Competition (APC) 
members and its management. 
On the institutional framework limited progress was registered. According to the Roadmap 
for fulfilling the remaining obligations for chapter 22, the Law on European Structural and 
Investment funds, which is to formalise and legally define such a framework is currently only 
planned for the third quarter of 2024. However, the EU regulation establishing the IPA III for 
the period 2021-2027 has emphasized the importance and urgency of such a definition. The 
institutional set up and the system for management of IPA funds in indirect management still 
needs to be adapted to IPA III requirements. Decisions on the appointment of institutions and 
bodies that will implement IPA III should be formalised urgently, taking into account their 
future role in cohesion policy.  
On administrative capacities, the lack of adequate resources for procurement, contract 
management and preparation and implementation of key structural reforms remains a 
weakness.  The implementation of the staff retention policy was resumed in the second 
semester of 2021, being implemented through a salary supplement for staff within IPA 


===== PAGE 120 =====
 
119 
 
structures. However, the hiring of additional experienced staff, the delivery of targeted 
trainings, as well as clearer strategic directions from management boards from the Ministries, 
remains necessary so to build capacity and motivate staff. The contracting of IPA 2017 funds 
by December 2021 resulted in a better performance compared to the previous year. This 
noted, coordination between the contracting authorities and line ministries still requires 
strengthening. Significant capacity strengthening is also still needed to achieve efficiency in 
the preparation and implementation of public procurement, while the contracting of IPA 2018 
funds are still at risk, and preparatory activities for the procurement of IPA 2020 funds 
proceed at too slow a pace. Greater investment in resources, particularly in the Public Works 
Administration, is needed. The capacities of indirect management structures still need to be 
further strengthened to ensure they can effectively operate in an ex-post control environment. 
Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions 
This chapter covers the rules governing the funding of the EU budget (‘own resources’). 
These resources mainly consist of: (i) contributions based on the gross national income of 
each Member State; (ii) customs duties; (iii) the non-recycled plastic resource; and (iv) a 
resource based on value-added tax. Member States must have the appropriate administrative 
capacity to adequately coordinate and ensure the correct calculation, collection, payment 
and control of own resources. 
Montenegro has some level of preparation regarding EU financial and budgetary 
provisions. Limited progress was made in meeting last year’s recommendations, mostly on 
increased capacities of the Directorate for coordination and management of EU own 
resources within the Ministry of Finance. The 2021 recommendations remain largely valid.  
In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ further set up the institutional framework and rules of administration for the own 
resources system; 
→ further align the legal basis for the underlying policy areas affecting the correct 
application of the own resources system: taxation (VAT), customs union, financial 
control and statistics; 
→ continue strengthening the capacity of the Directorate for coordination and management 
of EU own resources and of all other institutions involved in the own resources system. 
Overall, there was little progress in the underlying policy areas indirectly affecting the own 
reources system (for progress in these areas, see Chapters 16 – Taxation, 18 – Statistics, 29 – 
Customs union, and 32 – Financial control).  
On traditional own resources, analysis of the accounting rules (A&B accounts) and 
definition of income according to its future classification continued, including simulation 
exercises on A and B accounting and on submission of reports on detected cases of fraud and 
irregularities. Efforts continued on fraud reporting in line with the own resources database 
(OWNRES) requirements. Implementing legislation concerning compulsory enforcement on 
movable and immovable property is under preparation in line with the provisions of the Law 
on tax administration. On the collection of customs debt, instructions for writing-off of 
customs debt have yet to be finalised in conformity with the new Customs law adopted in 
July 2022.  
On value added tax-based resource, in December 2021, further amendments to the value 
added tax (VAT) law led to a reduction in trade taxation of food and beverages, with the 
exception of alcoholic beverages, carbonated soft beverages containing added sugar and 


===== PAGE 121 =====
 
120 
 
coffee. However, further alignment of the VAT law with the EU acquis remains necessary. 
On gross national income-based resources, Montenegro’s gross domestic product (GDP) is 
calculated using the European system of national and regional accounts (ESA) 2010 
methodology. Gross national income (GNI) data are available since 2010 and are published 
on the website of the Statistical Office of Montenegro. Sustained efforts are still needed as 
regards the exhaustiveness of the national accounts and GDP/GNI calculations. 
As regards administrative infrastructure, the Directorate for coordination and management 
of own resources of the EU within the Ministry of Finance is gradually improving its 
capacities focusing on planning, coordination and calculation of own resources, better 
definition of internal procedures and instructions, as well as alignment with the EU own 
resources administrative conditions. The implementation of the 2019 own resources action 
plan is ongoing, with the last annual progress report adopted by the Government in June 
2022. An Action Plan for addressing the key recommendations from the European 
Commission’s Montenegro 2021 report was adopted in December 2021. An EU funded 
project supporting the establishment of Montenegro’s management system of EU own 
resources started in May 2022.   
CLUSTER 6: EXTERNAL RELATIONS  
There are two chapters in this cluster: namely, chapter 30-external relations, which was 
provisionally closed in June 2017, and chapter 31-foreign, security and defence policy, where 
the single closing benchmark (concerning Montenegro’s bilateral immunity agreement with 
the United States) has yet to be fulfilled.  
Montenegro continues full alignment with the EU’s Common Foreign and Security policy 
including with the EU restrictive measures following Russia’s unprovoked aggression against 
Ukraine, as well as coordinating its positions with those of the EU, including within the 
WTO, and maintains good cooperation with international organisations.  
Progress can be noted on the adoption of the law on export control of dual-use goods, in line 
with the EU acquis, and the ratification of CEFTA Additional Protocol 6. Montenegro is 
invited to continue legislative alignment where necessary, and is also encouraged to 
implement actions under the Common Regional Market, based on the EU rules. Montenegro 
is encouraged to continue its full alignment with all EU CFSP positions and declarations. The 
alignment with the EU common positions on the integrity of the Rome Statute would allow 
the provisional closure of the remaining chapter under this cluster.  
Chapter 30: External relations  
The EU has a common trade and commercial policy towards third countries, based on 
multilateral and bilateral agreements and autonomous measures. There are also EU rules in 
the field of humanitarian aid and development policy. 
Montenegro has achieved a good level of preparation. Good progress was achieved in the 
past year, with the adoption of the law on export control of dual-use goods, in line with the 
EU acquis, and the ratification of CEFTA Additional Protocol 6 (AP 6) on trade in services. 
Amendments to the country’s legal and institutional framework on development and 
humanitarian aid are in preparation.  
In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ continue to actively participate in the implementation of actions in the context of the 
Common Regional Market Action Plan 2021-2024 and in particular ensure constructive 
participation in the negotiations on CEFTA AP 7 on dispute settlement, and its swift 


===== PAGE 122 =====
 
121 
 
ratification and start implementing CEFTA AP 6 on trade in services; 
→ Adopt amendments to the Laws on international development cooperation and 
international humanitarian assistance. 
In November 2021, the government adopted a roadmap for fulfilling the remaining 
obligations related to chapter 30. The document identifies key challenges for 2022 and 2023 
and addresses last year’s recommendations. It also identifies horizontal links with other 
chapters and thematic clusters, in line with the revised enlargement methodology.  
On the common commercial policy, Montenegro continued to coordinate its positions with 
those of the EU, including in the WTO. In this context, in March 2022, Montenegro 
supported notably the Joint Statement on aggression by the Russian Federation against 
Ukraine with the support of Belarus.  
The Law on export control of dual-use goods was adopted in December 2021 and has been 
applied since January 2022. It contains most of the provisions of the latest EU Regulation 
from May 2021, leaving out certain parts that could be applied only once Montenegro joins 
the EU. This was complemented by the adoption of the national control list of dual-use goods 
in March 2022, aligned with the latest EU list. Earlier, in June 2021, the government 
amended its control list for export and import of goods, aligning it with the EU control list of 
2019. Montenegro`s application process to join the Wassenaar Arrangement is still ongoing. 
The application for membership in the Australia Group is under preparation.  
Following the decision to involve the European Investment Bank in the development of the 
implementing legislation on export credit insurance against non-market risks, the timeline for 
the adoption shifted to the last quarter of 2022. This piece of legislation follows the adoption 
of the Law on the investment and development fund, which regulates the issuing and 
financing of export credits. 
Montenegro continues to participate actively in CEFTA working groups, including in 
negotiations on CEFTA AP 7 on trade dispute settlement, and fulfils its commitments within 
the Common Regional Market. In December 2021, the parliament ratified CEFTA AP 6 on 
trade in services.  
In July 2021, the government adopted a new Montenegrin Bilateral Investment Treaty model 
that will serve as a basis for future treaties. The Common Regional Market action plan 
specifies that each partner needs to negotiate economy-specific International Investment 
Agreements (IIAs) based on the Regionally Accepted Standards for IIA negotiations. 
Montenegro has 24 bilateral investment treaties currently in force, more than half with the 
EU member states.  
Concerning bilateral trade agreements, in December 2021 the parliament ratified a Free 
Trade Agreement (FTA) with EFTA countries on the rules of origin related to the revised 
Pan-Euro-Mediterranean (PEM) Convention. In December 2021, the parliament also ratified 
amendments to the FTA with Türkiye, aimed to ensure additional liberalisation of trade in 
agricultural products and access to the services market. The government initiated 
amendments to the FTA with Ukraine concerning rules of origin and methods of 
administrative cooperation. 
Negotiations for an Agreement on Trade, Partnership and Cooperation between Montenegro 
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland are ongoing. Montenegro 
should avoid any violation of its obligations arising from the Stabilisation and Association 
Agreement. 


===== PAGE 123 =====
 
122 
 
On development policy and humanitarian aid, amendments to the Law on international 
development cooperation and international humanitarian assistance are being prepared, with 
the aim to improve the country’s legal and institutional framework in these areas. A database 
on donor support projects that would use the OECD Development Assistance Committee 
methodology remains to be developed. 
Montenegro should continue working on this chapter in accordance with its overall action 
plan on external relations. 
Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy  
Member States must be able to conduct political dialogues in the framework of the foreign, 
security and defence policy, align with EU statements, take part in EU actions and apply 
agreed sanctions and restrictive measures. 
Concerning EU foreign, security and defence policy, Montenegro has a good level of 
preparation. Good progress was made as the country continued its track-record of full 
alignment with the EU CFSP, including with the EU restrictive measures following Russia’s 
unprovoked aggression against Ukraine, as well as on Belarus, and has provided assistance 
to Ukraine. Montenegro needs to align with EU common positions on the integrity of the 
Rome Statute and related EU guiding principles on bilateral immunity agreements. As a 
Member of the Human Rights Council, Montenegro has been actively engaged in promoting 
and defending the rules-based international order.  
In the coming year, Montenegro should: 
→ maintain its full alignment with the EU foreign, security and defence policy 
→ adopt the strategy on countering hybrid threats and related action plan. 
The political dialogue between the EU and Montenegro on foreign and security policy issues 
continued, including through Montenegro’s active engagement in the EU-Western Balkans 
informal CFSP Dialogue at political directors’ level.  
On common foreign and security policy, 100% alignment with all relevant High 
Representative statements on behalf of the EU, and Council decisions continued, a strong 
signal of Montenegro’s strategic commitment to the EU path.  This included all EU sanction 
packages against Russia and Belarus.  
Montenegro also aligned with the EU position in UNGA when voting on resolutions 
regarding Russia’s aggression against Ukraine and its humanitarian impact. Montenegro 
voted for suspension of the Russian Federation in the UN Human Rights Council. 
In March 2022, the caretaker government adopted three decisions on the practical 
implementation of restrictive measures against Russia and established a coordination body 
that should monitor the implementation of international measures on the crisis in Ukraine. 
The implementation of those decisions is ongoing, including the identification and temporary 
confiscation of 44 properties owned by 34 Russian citizens in several municipalities of 
Montenegro.  
The country maintains a bilateral immunity agreement with the United States, granting US 
citizens exemptions from the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court. In doing so, the 
country does not comply with the EU common positions on the integrity of the Rome Statute 
or related EU guiding principles on bilateral immunity agreements. Alignment with the EU 
position is therefore needed.  


===== PAGE 124 =====
 
123 
 
Concerning conflict prevention, Montenegro remained actively engaged in the 
implementation of the Western Balkans SALW (Small Arms and Light Weapons) Roadmap 
and implemented its 2019-2025 strategy and action plan for combating illegal possession, 
misuse and trafficking of SALW.  
Regarding non-proliferation, Montenegro is a state party to 29 international agreements in 
the field of CBRN and proliferation threats and risks. It is member to the Arms Trade Treaty, 
and has an active application for membership in the Wassenaar Arrangement. The country 
also expressed an interest to join the Australian Group regime. During the reporting period, 
the authorities finalised the draft roadmap for the period 2022-2027 to encompass measures 
addressing CBRN (chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear) threats and risks, as well as 
measures for the implementation of UNSC Resolution 1540.  
On security and defence, the implementation of the Defence Strategy adopted in 2019 and 
related action plan continued.  
Montenegro continued successful cooperation with international organisations (UN, 
OSCE, and Council of Europe) and remained an active member in NATO missions, 
including in NATO KFOR in Kosovo and NATO NMI in Iraq. It continued to contribute to 
NATO presence on the Eastern flank by participating in enhanced Forward Presence (eFP). 
In the framework of NATO co-operation, in March 2022, Montenegro provided assistance to 
Ukraine with 300 ballistic vests, 500 helmets and 7,000 dry meal packages. Montenegro took 
active part in various NATO exercises and trainings.  
Montenegro continued participation in EU crisis management missions and operations 
under the common security and defence policy, namely in the EU NAVFOR ATALANTA 
and the EU Training Mission (EUTM) in Mali, as well as in the UN peacekeeping operation 
MINURSO. 
Regarding hybrid threats, Montenegro completed the EU’s hybrid risk survey with the 
objective of identifying systemic vulnerabilities and streamlining the assistance provided by 
the EU in this field. Montenegro maintained active participation in the European Centre of 
Excellence for Countering Hybrid Threats. Adoption of the strategy on countering hybrid 
threats and related action plan is still pending. Active response to enhancing cyber resilience 
against malicious behaviour in cyberspace is called for given the cyber-attack experienced in 
autumn 2022. 
 
 


===== PAGE 125 =====
 
124 
 
ANNEX I – RELATIONS BETWEEN THE EU AND MONTENEGRO  
 
Within the framework of the accession negotiations, by October 2022, all 33 screened 
chapters, including chapters 23 and 24 on the rule of law, had been opened, three of which, 
i.e. science and research, education and culture and external relations, have been 
provisionally closed. 
Montenegro is participating in the Stabilisation and Association Process. Overall, 
Montenegro continued to broadly implement its obligations under the Stabilisation and 
Association Agreement (SAA). Regular political and economic dialogue between the EU 
and Montenegro has continued through the SAA structures. Regular subcommittee meetings 
were held throughout the period. The Stabilisation and Association Committee met in 
January 2022 and the SA Council in July 2022. The Stabilisation and Association 
Parliamentary Committee met in December 2021. 
Montenegro participates in the ministerial dialogue between the economic and finance 
ministers of the EU and the candidate countries, which aims at helping the latter to gradually 
meet the economic accession criteria and be better prepared in terms of economic reforms, 
competitiveness and job creation. The most recent meeting was held on 24 May 2022. 
Visa liberalisation for citizens of Montenegro travelling to the Schengen area has been in 
force since December 2009. As part of the monitoring mechanism in place since visa 
liberalisation, the Commission has been regularly assessing the progress made by the country 
in implementing reforms introduced under the visa roadmap. The Commission’s August 2021 
fourth report under the visa suspension mechanism concluded that Montenegro continues to 
meet the visa liberalisation benchmarks. A readmission agreement between the European 
Union and Montenegro has been in force since 2008. 
Under the Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance 2021 – 2027 (IPA III), a first financing 
decision of EUR 32.41 million was adopted at the end of 2021, providing support for EU 
accession and post-COVID-19 recovery, and enhancing the country’s reforms in the areas of 
agriculture, the protection of the environment, transport and support to the reform of the 
country’s economic governance and investment planning. This first set of programmes, 
complemented by a significant package of multi-country programmes and the rural 
development programme IPARD III, provide a significant contribution to kick-start the 
implementation of the Economic and Investment Plan for the Western Balkans and the Green 
and Digital Agendas.  
New activities will build on and add to the on-going programmes under IPA II (2014-2020), 
which are still providing significant support for the social and economic development of the 
country and contributing to key reforms in the Rule of Law, Public Administration Reform 
and other sectors. Montenegro also benefits from dedicated EU support aimed at protecting 
the environment and boosting connectivity with EU transport systems. In addition, by the end 
of 2021 the specially devised COVID-19 response Budget Support programme finalised its 
important support to the authorities’ social and economic response to the crisis. 
Montenegro continues to benefit from support under the IPA multi-country and regional 
programmes. These programmes have been also, in part, repurposed to address the response 
to the COVID-19 crisis. Additionally, Montenegro participates in four cross-border 
cooperation programmes with neighbouring Western Balkan countries and in transnational 
cooperation programmes with Member States under the European Regional Development 
Fund and the IPA Adriatic cross-border programme. 


===== PAGE 126 =====
 
125 
 
Montenegro benefitted under IPA II from participation in the following Union programmes, 
with IPA support: Erasmus+, Creative Europe (Culture and Media strands), Europe for 
Citizens, ISA - Interoperability solutions for public administrations, businesses and citizens, 
Employment and Social Innovation, Horizon 2020, Customs 2020, Fiscalis 2020, 
Competitiveness of Enterprises and Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises Programme 
(COSME). Montenegro also participates with their own funds in the EU Justice Programme.  
The full list of programmes for IPA III has not yet been defined. 
The Commission set aside EUR 70 million in grants from IPA II for the Western Balkan 
partners to obtain COVID-19 vaccines as well as equipment and supplies for the 
implementation of the vaccination campaigns.  Montenegro received EUR 2.453 million of 
these funds. A total of 573 220 doses of COVID-19 vaccines were provided to Montenegro 
through resales and donations of EU Member States and direct EU funded purchases from 
vaccine suppliers. Montenegro also received 48 000 COVID-19 vaccines via the COVAX 
initiative, which is significantly supported by the EU. 
 
 


===== PAGE 127 =====
 
 
STATISTICAL DATA (as of 01.09.2022) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Montenegro 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Basic data 
Note 
2009 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
Population (thousand) 
 
617 s 
622 s 
622 s 
622 s 
622 s 
622 s 
Total area of the country (km²) 
 
13 812 w 
13 812 w 
13 812 w 
13 812 w 
: 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National accounts 
Note 
2009 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
Gross domestic product (GDP) (million euro) 
 
2 994 
3 954 
4 299 
4 663 
4 951 
4 186 
GDP (euro per capita) 
 
4 840 
6 350 
6 910 
7 490 
7 960 
6 740 
GDP per capita (in purchasing power standards (PPS)) 
 
9 832 
12 637 
13 516 
14 590 
15 696 
13 356 
GDP per capita (in PPS), relative to the EU average (EU-27 = 100) 
 
40.9 
44.8 
46.1 
48.2 
50.1 
44.6 
Real GDP growth rate: change on previous year of GDP volume (%) 
 
-  5.8 
2.9 
4.7 
5.1 
4.1 
-  15.3 
Employment growth (national accounts data), relative to the previous year (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Labour productivity growth: growth in GDP (in volume) per person employed, relative to the 
previous year (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Unit labour cost growth, relative to the previous year (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
**3 year change (T/T-3) in the nominal unit labour cost growth index (2015 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Labour productivity per person employed: GDP (in PPS) per person employed relative to EU 
average (EU-27 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Gross value added by main sectors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries (%) 
 
10.0 
9.0 
8.4 
8.2 
7.9 
9.1 
Industry (%) 
 
14.3 
12.2 
11.3 
12.5 
11.9 
13.5 
Construction (%) 
 
6.6 
6.7 
6.9 
7.0 
7.9 
7.3 
Services (%) 
 
69.2 s 
72.0 s 
73.5 s 
72.4 s 
72.2 s 
70.0 s 
Final consumption expenditure, as a share of GDP (%) 
 
103.8 
96.4 
93.2 
91.9 
89.2 
103.8 
Gross fixed capital formation, as a share of GDP (%) 
 
27.3 
24.7 
26.9 
29.2 
27.3 
27.9 
Changes in inventories, as a share of GDP (%) 
 
-  0.4 
1.4 
3.3 
2.7 
4.7 
3.3 
Exports of goods and services, relative to GDP (%) 
 
34.3 
40.6 
41.1 
42.9 
43.8 
26.0 


===== PAGE 128 =====
 
 
Imports of goods and services, relative to GDP (%) 
 
65.1 
63.1 
64.5 
66.7 
65.0 
61.0 
Gross fixed capital formation by the general government sector, as a percentage of GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business 
Note 
2009 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
Industrial production volume index (2015 = 100) 
 
96.7 
97.0 
92.9 
113.7 
106.7 
105.6 
Number of active enterprises (number) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Birth rate: number of enterprise births in the reference period (t) divided by the number of 
enterprises active in t (%) 
 
: 
13.1 w 
7.1 w 
11.2 w 
11.2 w 
8.5 w 
Death rate: number of enterprise deaths in the reference period (t) divided by the number of 
enterprises active in t (%) 
 
: 
6.1 w 
5.4 w 
4.8 w 
3.3 w 
4.7 w 
People employed in SMEs as a share of all persons employed (within the non-financial 
business economy) (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Value added by SMEs (in the non-financial business economy) (EUR million) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Total value added (in the non-financial business economy) (EUR million) 
 
: 
1 530 w 
1 780 w 
2 021 w 
2 205 w 
1 819 w 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inflation rate and house prices 
Note 
2009 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
Consumer price index (CPI), change relative to the previous year (%) 
 
: 
0.1 w 
2.8 w 
2.9 w 
0.5 w 
-  0.8 w 
**Annual change in the deflated house price index (2015 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Balance of payments 
Note 
2009 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
Balance of payments: current account total (million euro) 
 
: 
-  642.0 
-  692.0 
-  793.0 
-  707.0 
- 1 091.0 
Balance of payments current account: trade balance (million euro) 
 
: 
- 1 658.0 
- 1 860.0 
- 2 050.0 
- 2 065.0 
- 1 643.0 
Balance of payments current account: net services (million euro) 
 
: 
771.0 
852.0 
935.0 
1 019.0 
176.0 
Balance of payments current account: net balance for primary income (million euro) 
 
: 
34.0 
89.0 
55.0 
56.0 
66.0 
Balance of payments current account: net balance for secondary income (million euro) 
 
: 
213.0 
229.0 
265.0 
284.0 
308.0 
Net balance for primary and secondary income: of which government transfers (million euro) 
 
: 
26.0 
22.0 
34.0 
49.0 
51.0 
**3 year backward moving average of the current account balance relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
-  13.2 
-  14.4 
-  16.4 
-  15.8 
-  19.1 
**Five year change in share of world exports of goods and services (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
19.2 
27.2 
-  31.2 
Net balance (inward - outward) of foreign direct investment (FDI) (million euro) 
 
1 066.5 w 
372.0 s 
484.0 s 
323.0 s 
345.0 s 
467.5 w 


===== PAGE 129 =====
 
 
Foreign direct investment (FDI) abroad (million euro) 
 
32.9 w 
-  167.0 
10.0 
92.0 
67.0 
-  4.5 w 
of which FDI of the reporting economy in the EU-27 countries (million euro) 
 
: 
-  4.6 w 
-  4.6 w 
78.0 
1.0 
-  2.0 w 
Foreign direct investment (FDI) in the reporting economy (million euro) 
 
1 099.4 w 
205.0 
494.0 
415.0 
412.0 
463.0 w 
of which FDI of the EU-27 countries in the reporting economy (million euro) 
 
: 
-  44.0 w 
161.4 w 
19.0 
41.0 
90.9 w 
**Net international investment position, relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
-  177.4 w 
-  170.1 w 
-  168.5 w 
-  167.9 w 
-  206.2 w 
Year on year rate of change in gross inflow of remittances (in national currency) from migrant 
workers (%) 
1) 
2.1 sw 
4.8 s 
4.7 s 
4.9 s 
4.8 s 
6.3 s 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Public finance 
Note 
2009 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
General government deficit / surplus, relative to GDP (%) 
 
-  5.7 w 
-  2.8 w 
-  5.7 w 
-  4.6 w 
-  2.0 w 
-  10.7 ew 
General government gross debt relative to GDP (%) 
 
38.1 w 
64.4 w 
64.2 w 
70.1 ew 
76.5 w 
103.1 w 
Total  government revenues, as a percentage of GDP (%) 
 
45.4 w 
42.6 w 
41.5 w 
42.2 w 
43.4 w 
43.7 ew 
Total government expenditure, as a percentage of GDP (%) 
 
51.1 w 
46.2 w 
46.8 w 
46.2 w 
45.4 w 
54.4 ew 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Financial indicators 
Note 
2009 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
Gross external debt of the whole economy, relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
162.6 s 
160.6 s 
164.7 s 
169.0 sw 
224.1 sw 
Gross external debt of the whole economy, relative to total exports (%) 
 
: 
401.0 w 
392.2 w 
381.7 w 
385.5 w 
862.2 w 
Money supply: M1 (banknotes, coins, overnight deposits, million euro) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Money supply: M2 (M1 plus deposits with maturity up to two years, million euro) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Money supply: M3 (M2 plus marketable instruments, million euro) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Total credit by monetary financial institutions to residents (consolidated) (million euro) 
2) 
2 373.4 w 
2 080.6 w 
2 294.1 w 
2 528.0 w 
2 727.3 w 
2 841.0 w 
**Annual change in financial sector liabilities (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
**Private credit flow, consolidated, relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
**Private debt, consolidated, relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Interest rates: day-to-day money rate, per annum (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Lending interest rate (one year), per annum (%) 
3) 
9.38 w 
7.45 w 
6.81 w 
6.36 w 
6.01 w 
5.84 w 
Deposit interest rate (one year), per annum (%) 
3) 
3.87 w 
0.93 w 
0.69 w 
0.56 w 
0.40 w 
0.40 w 
Euro exchange rates: average of period (1 euro = … national currency) 
 
: 
1 w 
1 w 
1 w 
1 w 
: 


===== PAGE 130 =====
 
 
Trade-weighted effective exchange rate index, 42 countries (2015 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
**3 year change (T/T-3) in the trade-weighted effective exchange rate index, 42 countries 
(2015 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Value of reserve assets (including gold) (million euro) 
 
397.5 w 
752.7 w 
847.1 w 
1 049.8 w 
1 366.8 w 
1 738.5 w 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
External trade in goods 
Note 
2009 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
Value of imports: all goods, all partners (million euro) 
 
1 654 
2 062 
2 304 
2 554 
2 601 
2 105 
Value of exports: all goods, all partners (million euro) 
 
277 
326 
372 
400 
416 
366 
Trade balance: all goods, all partners (million euro) 
 
- 1 377 
- 1 736 
- 1 932 
- 2 154 
- 2 185 
- 1 739 
Terms of trade (export price index / import price index * 100) (number) 
 
: 
98.0 sw 
103.3 sw 
100.7 sw 
99.1 sw 
102.7 sw 
Share of exports to EU-27 countries in value of total exports (%) 
 
50.9 s 
36.6 s 
33.3 s 
43.1 s 
37.0 s 
37.7 s 
Share of imports from EU-27 countries in value of total imports (%) 
 
41.3 s 
47.4 s 
46.5 s 
47.1 s 
47.0 s 
44.2 s 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Demography 
Note 
2009 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
Crude rate of natural change of population (natural growth rate): number of births minus 
deaths (per thousand inhabitants) 
 
4.5 
1.8 
1.5 
1.2 
1.0 
-  0.3 
Infant mortality rate deaths of children under one year of age (per thousand live births) 
 
5.7 
3.4 
1.3 
1.7 
2.4 
2.8 
Life expectancy at birth: male (years) 
 
72.9 
74.1 
73.9 
74.5 
74.0 
73.2 
Life expectancy at birth: female (years) 
 
77.5 
78.9 
79.2 
79.3 
79.5 
78.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Labour market 
Note 
2009 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
Economic activity rate for persons aged 20–64: proportion of the population aged 20–64 that 
is economically active (%) 
 
: 
69.1 
69.3 
70.5 
71.8 
67.2 
*Employment rate for persons aged 20–64: proportion of the population aged 20–64 that are 
in employment (%) 
 
: 
57.1 
58.2 
59.8 
60.8 
55.2 
Male employment rate for persons aged 20–64 (%) 
 
: 
63.0 
65.2 
66.7 
67.5 
61.7 
Female employment rate for persons aged 20–64 (%) 
 
: 
51.3 
51.4 
52.9 
54.2 
48.8 
Employment rate for persons aged 55–64: proportion of the population aged 55–64 that are 
in employment (%) 
 
: 
41.2 
43.7 
46.6 
50.1 
44.2 
Employment by main sectors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 131 =====
 
 
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries (%) 
 
: 
7.8 s 
7.9 s 
8.0 s 
7.1 s 
7.5 s 
Industry (%) 
 
: 
9.9 s 
9.5 s 
9.9 s 
9.5 s 
10.1 s 
Construction (%) 
 
: 
7.7 s 
7.6 s 
9.0 s 
9.9 s 
8.3 s 
Services (%) 
 
: 
73.8 s 
74.1 s 
72.5 s 
73.1 s 
73.5 s 
People employed in the public sector as a share of total employment, persons aged 20–64 
(%) 
4) 
35.7 w 
31.2 w 
32.6 w 
31.7 w 
29.3 w 
30.5 w 
People employed in the private sector as a share of total employment, persons aged 20–64 
(%) 
5) 6) 
46.9 w 
47.5 w 
45.7 w 
63.9 bw 
66.5 w 
65.6 w 
Unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force that is unemployed (%) 
 
: 
17.8 
16.1 
15.2 
15.2 
17.9 
Male unemployment rate (%) 
 
: 
18.3 
15.4 
15.3 
14.7 
17.5 
Female unemployment rate (%) 
 
: 
17.1 
17.0 
15.1 
15.7 
18.4 
Youth unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force aged 15–24 that is unemployed (%) 
 
: 
35.9 
31.7 
29.4 
25.2 
36.0 
Long-term unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force that has been unemployed for 
12 months or more (%) 
 
: 
13.4 
12.5 
11.4 
12.0 
13.4 
Unemployment rate for persons (aged 25–64) having completed at most lower secondary 
education (ISCED levels 0-2) (%) 
 
: 
22.1 
21.7 
21.0 
26.9 
35.2 
Unemployment rate for persons (aged 25–64) having completed tertiary education (ISCED 
levels 5-8) (%) 
 
: 
11.5 
10.7 
10.0 
11.0 
12.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social cohesion 
Note 
2009 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
Average nominal monthly wages and salaries (national currency) 
 
416 w 
499 w 
510 w 
511 w 
515 w 
524 w 
Index of real wages and salaries (index of nominal wages and salaries divided by the 
inflation index) (2016 = 100) 
 
103 w 
100 w 
100 w 
98 w 
98 w 
100 w 
GINI coefficient 
 
: 
37 
37 
35 
34 
33 
Poverty gap 
 
: 
35.6 
34.0 
35.3 
33.1 
28.2 
*Early leavers from education and training: proportion of the population aged 18–24 with at 
most lower secondary education who are not in further education or training (%) 
 
7.0 w 
5.5 
5.4 
4.6 
5.0 
3.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Standard of living 
Note 
2009 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
Number of passenger cars relative to population size (number per thousand population) 
 
289.9 sw 
297.0 
310.0 
332.0 
350.0 
337.9 sw 


===== PAGE 132 =====
 
 
Number of mobile phone subscriptions relative to population size (number per thousand 
population) 
 
2 496.5 w 
1 632.5 w 
1 636.7 w 
1 822.8 w 
1 849.9 w 
1 736.8 w 
Mobile broadband penetration (per 100 inhabitants) 
 
3.2 w 
8.9 w 
10.5 w 
8.8 w 
8.0 w 
7.7 w 
Fixed broadband penetration (per 100 inhabitants) 
 
8 w 
19 w 
22 w 
25 w 
29 w 
30 w 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Infrastructure 
Note 
2009 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
Density of railway network (lines in operation per thousand km²) 
 
18.1 sw 
18.0 s 
18.0 s 
18.0 s 
18.0 s 
: 
Length of motorways (kilometres) 
 
 z 
 z 
 z 
 z 
 z 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Innovation and research 
Note 
2009 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
Public expenditure on education relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
*Gross domestic expenditure on R&D relative to GDP (%) 
 
1.12 sw 
0.32 
0.35 
0.50 
0.36 sw 
: 
Government budget appropriations or outlays on R&D (GBAORD), as a percentage of GDP 
(%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Percentage of households who have internet access at home (%) 
 
: 
: 
71.0 
72.0 
74.0 
80.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environment 
Note 
2009 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
*Index of greenhouse gas emissions,  CO2 equivalent (1990 = 100) 
 
58.0 w 
61.2 w 
62.9 w 
67.1 w 
64.7 w 
: 
Energy intensity of the economy (kg of oil equivalent per 1 000 euro GDP at 2015 constant 
prices) 
 
296.7 
263.1 
263.3 
259.5 
258.2 
280.3 
Electricity generated from renewable sources relative to gross electricity consumption (%) 
 
46.6 
51.0 
50.1 
52.4 
53.6 
61.5 
Road share of inland freight transport (based on tonne-km) (%) 
7) 
64.1 w 
58.5 w 
39.0 w 
55.7 w 
45.4 w 
41.8 w 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Energy 
Note 
2009 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
Primary production of all energy products (thousand TOE) 
 
549 
662 
624 
728 
736 
726 
Primary production of crude oil (thousand TOE) 
 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Primary production of solid fuels (thousand TOE) 
 
211 
317 
335 
362 
396 
400 
Primary production of gas (thousand TOE) 
 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net imports of all energy products (thousand TOE) 
 
415 s 
342 s 
420 s 
334 s 
365 s 
280 s 


===== PAGE 133 =====
 
 
Gross inland energy consumption (thousand TOE) 
 
965 
990 
1 037 
1 074 
1 112 
1 023 
Gross electricity generation (GWh) 
 
2 760 
3 141 
2 483 
3 811 
3 433 
3 381 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture 
Note 
2009 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
Agricultural production volume index of goods and services (at producer prices) (2010 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Utilised agricultural area (thousand hectares) 
 
221.5 
255.9 p 
256.4 p 
256.8 p 
257.5 p 
258.0 p 
Livestock numbers: live bovine animals (thousand heads, end of period) 
 
: 
89.0 p 
87.0 p 
83.3 p 
81.4 p 
: 
Livestock numbers: live swine (thousand heads, end of period) 
 
: 
55.0 p 
25.0 p 
23.6 p 
23.0 p 
: 
Livestock numbers: live sheep and live goats (thousand heads, end of period) 
 
: 
223.0 ps 
218.0 ps 
216.0 ps 
210.8 ps 
: 
Raw milk available on farms (thousand tonnes) 
 
: 
180.6 p 
181.4 p 
181.5 p 
178.0 p 
: 
Harvested crop production: cereals (including rice) (thousand tonnes) 
 
4.3 
7.7 p 
7.9 p 
8.0 p 
7.6 p 
7.3 p 
Harvested crop production: sugar beet (thousand tonnes) 
 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Harvested crop production: vegetables (thousand tonnes) 
 
30.0 
41.8 p 
41.2 p 
42.3 p 
40.1 p 
39.4 p 
 
Source: Eurostat and the statistical authorities in Montenegro 
 
 
: = not available 
 
b = break in series 
 
e = estimated value 
 
p = provisional 
 
s = Eurostat estimate 
 
w= data supplied by and under the responsibility of the national statistical authority and published on an "as is" basis and without any assurance as regards 
their quality and adherence to EU statistical methodology 
 
z =  not applicable and therefore equal to 0 
 
* = Europe 2020 indicator 
 
** = Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure (MIP) indicator 
 
 
 
Footnotes: 
1) 
Data are in accordance with the IMF Balance of Payments Manual, fifth edition. 


===== PAGE 134 =====
 
 
2) 
Loans include total banks' loans granted to non MFI residents and other claims (factoring and forfeiting, claims on outstanding bills of acceptance, 
guarantees and bills of exchange). 
3) 
Weighted average effective interest rate, outstanding amounts, annual. 
4) 
Data refer to number of employees in the public sector as a share of the total number of persons employed. 
5) 
Data refer to number of employees in the private sector as a share of the total number of persons employed. Comprises data of private companies or 
enterprises, entrepreneurs, private households and NGO. 
6) 
Break in series as previously only employees were answering this question; Since 2018 all employed persons are giving answer to this question. 
7) 
Total freight traffic (national territory and international tnsport). 


===== PAGE 135 =====
 
 
 
