===== PAGE 1 =====
 
EN 
 
 EN 
 
 
EUROPEAN 
COMMISSION 
Strasbourg, 19.10.2021  
SWD(2021) 290 final/2 
 
COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT 
Turkey 2021 Report 
Accompanying the document 
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the 
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions  
2021 Communication on EU Enlargement Policy 
{COM(2021) 644 final} - {SWD(2021) 288 final} - {SWD(2021) 289 final} -
 {SWD(2021) 291 final} - {SWD(2021) 292 final} - {SWD(2021) 293 final} -
 {SWD(2021) 294 final} 
 


===== PAGE 2 =====
 
0 
 
 
Table of Contents 
1. 
INTRODUCTION........................................................................................................................ 2 
1.1.  
Context 2 
1.2. Summary of the report  ............................................................................................... 3 
2. 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS .......................................... 10 
2.1. 
Functioning of democratic institutions and Public Administration   Reform ........... 10 
2.1.1. Democracy ..................................................................................................... 10 
2.1.2. Public Administration Reform .......................................................................... 18 
2.2. 
Rule of law and fundamental rights ..................................................................... 21 
2.2.1. 
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights ........................................ 21 
2.2.3 
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security ............................................. 41 
2.3 Economic criteria ....................................................................................................... 53 
2.3.1. The existence of a functioning market economy ............................................... 53 
2.3.2. The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the 
Union .................................................................................................. 61 
2.4. Public Procurement, Statistics, Financial control ......................................................... 64 
Chapter 5: Public procurement ................................................................................. 64 
Chapter 18: Statistics ................................................................................................ 66 
Chapter 32: Financial control .................................................................................... 67 
3. 
GOOD NEIGHBOURLY RELATIONS AND REGIONAL COOPERATION ...................................... 70 
4. 
ABILITY TO ASSUME OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP ........................................................... 73 
Cluster 2: Internal Market ................................................................................................ 73 
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods ......................................................................... 73 
Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers .......................................................... 75 
Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services ............................ 76 
Chapter 4 - Free movement of capital ....................................................................... 77 
Chapter 6: Company law ........................................................................................... 78 
Chapter 7: Intellectual property law .......................................................................... 79 
Chapter 8: Competition policy ................................................................................... 80 
Chapter 9: Financial services ..................................................................................... 82 
Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection ............................................................ 84 
Cluster 3: Competitiveness and inclusive growth ............................................................... 86 
Chapter 10: Information society and media ............................................................... 86 
Chapter 16: Taxation ................................................................................................ 88 
Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy ............................................................... 90 
Chapter 19: Social Policy and employment ................................................................ 91 


===== PAGE 3 =====
 
1 
 
Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy ............................................................... 94 
Chapter 25: Science and Research ............................................................................. 96 
Chapter 26: Education and culture ............................................................................ 97 
Chapter 29: Customs union ....................................................................................... 99 
Cluster 4: The Green agenda and sustainable connectivity ............................................... 100 
Chapter 14: Transport policy ................................................................................... 101 
Chapter 15: Energy ................................................................................................. 102 
Chapter 21: Trans-European networks .................................................................... 104 
Chapter 27: Environment and climate change .......................................................... 105 
Cluster 5: Resources, agriculture and cohesion ............................................................... 108 
Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development ....................................................... 108 
Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy ................................... 109 
Chapter 13: Fisheries .............................................................................................. 110 
Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments .................... 111 
Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions ....................................................... 112 
Cluster 6: External relations ........................................................................................... 113 
Chapter 30: External relations ................................................................................. 114 
Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy ..................................................... 115 
5. 
ANNEX I – RELATIONS BETWEEN THE EU AND TURKEY ...................................................... 119 
 


===== PAGE 4 =====
 
2 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION  
1.1.  
CONTEXT 
Turkey remains a key partner for the European Union. Turkey has been linked to the EU by 
an Association Agreement since 1964 and a Customs Union was established in 1995. The 
European Council granted Turkey the status of candidate country in December 1999 and 
accession negotiations were opened in October 2005. Within the framework of accession 
negotiations, 16 chapters have been opened and one of these was provisionally closed. The 
General Affairs Council conclusions of June 2019 reiterated the Council’s position of June 
2018 that under the current circumstances, Turkey’s accession negotiations have effectively 
come to a standstill, no further chapters can be considered for opening or closing1. Over the 
reporting period, the Turkish government did not reverse the negative trend as regards the 
reform agenda despite the Turkish government’s repeated commitment to the objective of EU 
accession. The EU’s serious concerns on the continued deterioration of democracy, the rule of 
law, fundamental rights and the independence of the judiciary have not been addressed. There 
was further backsliding in many areas.  
Relations with the EU deteriorated until December 2020, mostly due to actions taken by 
Turkey in the Eastern Mediterranean, directly challenging the rights of the Republic of 
Cyprus in its maritime zones. In addition, there was a sharp increase in provocative action 
taken by Turkey against Greece, a failure to advance in the Cyprus settlement process, and 
assertive action by Turkey in most of the surrounding regional conflicts, in ways that often 
were at odds with broader EU interests. Two individuals remain listed under the November 
2019 framework for restrictive measures for Turkey’s unauthorised drilling activities in the 
Eastern Mediterranean2. The duration of this framework was extended by an additional year 
in November 20203.  
Tensions in the Eastern Mediterranean eased in the beginning of 2021. The EU re-affirmed 
that it has a strategic interest in a stable and secure environment in the Eastern Mediterranean 
and in the development of a cooperative and mutually beneficial relationship with Turkey. 
The EU offered to nurture a more positive dynamic in EU-Turkey relations by expressing 
readiness to engage with Turkey in a phased, proportionate and reversible manner in a number 
of areas of common interest, subject to the conditionalities set out by the European Council. 
In that context high level dialogues were held on climate and migration and security to be 
followed by the dialogue on health soon. At the same time, the European Union remained 
committed to defending its interests and those of its Member States and uphold regional 
stability.  
Turkey continued its enormous efforts to host the largest refugee population in the world with 
around 3.7 million Syrians under temporary protection and more than 320 000 non-Syrians, 
including those who hold or have applied for international protection status. The EU Facility 
for Refugees in Turkey contributed to these efforts, with the full EUR 6 billion operational 
budget of the Facility contracted by the end of 2020 and over EUR 4.2 billion had been 
disbursed by August 2021. In addition to the EUR 6 billion already mobilised under the EU 
Facility for Refugees, in 2020 and 2021 EUR 585 million were earmarked from the EU 
budget for humanitarian support and to continue two important cash support programmes for 
refugees. In June 2021, the Commission proposed to allocate EUR 3 billion in additional 
assistance to Syrian refugees and host communities in Turkey.  
                                                          
1 The European Council conclusions of December 2006 remain in force. 
2 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32019D1894&from=GA 
3 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32020D1657&from=EN  


===== PAGE 5 =====
 
3 
 
The March 2016 EU-Turkey Statement continued yielding results and remained the key 
framework governing cooperation on migration despite Turkey’s repeated calls to update the 
Statement. Problems arose over implementation of the Statement due to Turkey’s unilateral 
suspending returns of irregular migrants and rejected asylum seekers from the Greek islands 
from March 2020 onwards, the emergence of alternative smuggling routes to Cyprus and 
Italy.  
The reporting period continued to be marked by the detrimental impact of the global COVID-
19 pandemic. By early October, Turkey had recorded around 7.2 million cases and about 
64 000 deaths related to the pandemic. Around 71 % of the population had been fully 
vaccinated. Turkey took considerable measures to boost domestic demand and soften the 
economic repercussions of the pandemic. Since the beginning of the pandemic the EU has 
stood by Turkey and taken several measures, including by reallocating over EUR 103 million 
of EU funds to help prevent and treat COVID-19 and to mitigate the economic and social 
impact. 
1.2. SUMMARY OF THE REPORT4 5 
There are serious deficiencies in the functioning of Turkey’s democratic institutions. 
Democratic backsliding continued during the reporting period. Structural deficiencies of the 
presidential system remained in place. Key recommendations of the Council of Europe and its 
bodies remain to be addressed. The Parliament continued to lack the necessary means to hold 
the government accountable. The constitutional architecture continued to centralise powers at 
the level of the Presidency without ensuring a sound and effective separation of powers 
between the executive, legislative and the judiciary. In the absence of an effective checks and 
balances mechanism, the democratic accountability of the executive branch remains limited to 
elections. Targeting of the opposition parties continued, including by the Constitutional 
Court’s acceptance of an indictment by the Chief Public Prosecutor of the Court of Cassation 
seeking to close down the second largest opposition party, which contributed to weakening 
political pluralism in Turkey. During the report period, the President dismissed the governor 
of the Central Bank twice. 
Despite ending the state of emergency in July 2018, certain legal provisions granting 
extraordinary powers to government authorities and retaining several restrictive elements 
from the emergency rule remained integrated into law, which continued to have a significant 
impact on democracy and fundamental rights. In July 2021, Turkey's parliament approved 
a bill that extends the duration of these restrictive elements of the state of emergency for one 
more year. The Inquiry Commission on the State of Emergency has not yet finalised 
examining its caseload concerning the public servants who were dismissed by decree during 
the emergency rule.  
Pressure on mayors from opposition parties by the ruling coalition government further 
weakened local democracy. Mayors from the opposition parties faced administrative and 
judicial investigations. In the south-east, the forcefully dismissed mayors continued to be 
                                                          
4 This report covers the period from June 2020 to June 2021. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from the government of Turkey, the EU Member States, European Parliament reports 
and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. This also includes the results of 
comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of law. 
5 For the state of play the report uses the following assessment scales: early stage, some level of preparation, 
moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. For progress made during the reporting 
period, the following scale has been used: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, good 
progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, also interim steps have been used. 
 


===== PAGE 6 =====
 
4 
 
replaced by government-appointed trustees, denying citizens their chosen representation. In 
most cases, the incoming trustees have kept the municipal assemblies suspended. Hundreds of 
local politicians and elected office holders were arrested on terrorism-related charges. 
The situation in the south-east remained very worrying. The government carried out 
domestic and cross-border security and military operations in Iraq and Syria. The security 
situation remained precarious in border areas with recurrent terrorist acts by the Kurdistan 
Workers’ Party (PKK), which remains on the EU list of persons, groups and entities involved 
in acts of terrorism. The EU unambiguously condemned the PKK’s attacks and expressed 
solidarity with the families of the victims. While the government has a legitimate right to fight 
terrorism, it is essential that it does so in accordance with the rule of law, human rights and 
fundamental freedoms. Anti-terror measures need to be proportionate. There were no 
developments on the resumption of a credible political process to achieve a peaceful and 
sustainable solution. Human rights organisations and opposition parties reported serious 
violations of human rights by security forces. 
Around 4 000 members and officials of the People’s Democratic Party (HDP) remain in 
prison, including a number of parliamentarians. In June, the Constitutional Court accepted an 
indictment demanding the closure of the HDP, seeking a political ban for 451 HDP 
executives, including the party’s co-chairs and all past and present members of Parliament 
and executives as well as a freeze on the party’s bank accounts. There were pending requests 
by the prosecution in the Parliament to lift the immunity of almost all HDP lawmakers.  
On civil society issues, serious backsliding continued. Civil society faced continuous pressure 
and their space to operate freely has continued to diminish limiting their freedom of 
expression and freedom of association. The new law on preventing financing of proliferation 
of weapons of mass destruction raises concerns with regard to possible restrictions on the 
activities of human rights defenders and civil society. 
The legal and institutional framework governing the security and intelligence sector remained 
unchanged with reinforced civilian oversight of the security forces under the presidential 
system. The government took steps to further consolidate the civilian control of the security 
forces.  
Turkey has some level of preparation/is moderately prepared in the field of public 
administration reform. It made no progress during the reporting period. Turkey lacks 
a comprehensive public administration reform agenda and a lead institution in charge of the 
process. Concerns remained over the accountability of the administration and human 
resources management. The political will to reform is still lacking. Although policy 
coordination among central government institutions remained strong, policymaking is not 
evidence-based or participatory. The politicisation of the administration continued. Women’s 
representation remained low in the higher echelons of the bureaucracy.  
Turkey’s judicial system is at an early stage of preparation. The serious backsliding observed 
since 2016 continued. Concerns remained, in particular over the systemic lack of 
independence of the judiciary and undue pressure on judges and prosecutors. The new human 
rights action plan envisages certain positive measures but it does not address any of the key 
shortcomings related to the independence of the judiciary. In particular, no measures are 
envisaged to improve respect for the principle of the separation of powers or to improve the 
structure and the selection process of members of the Council of Judges and Prosecutors, long 
outstanding recommendations of the Council of Europe Venice Commission and the 
European Commission. Despite their acquittal, none of the judges or prosecutors dismissed 
following the coup attempt were reinstated. The lack of objective, merit-based, uniform and 
pre-established criteria for recruiting and promoting judges and prosecutors remains a source 


===== PAGE 7 =====
 
5 
 
of concern. The institution of criminal law judges of peace continued to raise concerns over 
their jurisdiction and practice. 
Regarding the fight against corruption, Turkey remained at an early stage of preparations 
and made no progress in the reporting period. The country did not establish anti-corruption 
bodies in line with Turkey’s international obligations. The flaws of the legal framework and 
institutional architecture allowed undue political influence in the investigation and 
prosecution phases of corruption cases. The accountability and transparency of public 
institutions need to be improved. The absence of an anti-corruption strategy and action plan 
indicated a lack of will to fight decisively against corruption. Most of the Council of Europe’s 
Group of States against Corruption (GRECO) recommendations have not been implemented. 
Overall, corruption is widespread and remains an issue of concern. 
Turkey has some level of preparation in the fight against organised crime and made limited 
progress. Cooperation between Europol and Turkey is based on a Strategic Agreement on 
Cooperation, which entered into force in July 2004. Negotiations concerning an international 
agreement on the exchange of personal data between Europol and the Turkish authorities 
competent for fighting serious crime and terrorism are ongoing, requiring Turkey to reform its 
legislation aligning its data protection law with the European standards. Turkey should 
improve its track record on dismantling criminal networks and confiscating criminal assets. 
The legal framework regulating the fight against money laundering and terrorist financing 
needs to be improved in line with the recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force 
(FATF) and those of the Venice Commission on the law on preventing financing of 
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Efforts are needed to improve the legislation on 
cybercrime and witness protection.  
The deterioration of human and fundamental rights continued. Many of the measures 
brought in during the state of emergency remain in force. The legal framework includes 
general guarantees of respect for human and fundamental rights but the legislation and 
practice still need to be brought into line with the European Convention on Human Rights 
(ECHR) and the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) case-law. Broad-scale 
restrictions imposed on the activities of journalists, writers, lawyers, academics, human rights 
defenders and critical voices continued to have a negative effect on the exercise of their 
freedoms and have led to self-censorship. Turkey’s refusal to implement ECtHR rulings, 
notably in the cases of Selahattin Demirtaş and Osman Kavala, further increased concerns 
regarding the judiciary’s adherence to international and European standards. Turkey’s 
withdrawal from the Istanbul Convention also put into question its commitment to such 
standards. The new human rights action plan, which promised reforms in a number of areas, 
does not address critical issues.  
Serious backsliding continued on freedom of expression. Legislation and its implementation, 
especially national security and anti-terrorism provisions, continued to contravene the 
European Convention on Human Rights and other international standards and to diverge from 
ECtHR case law. The dissemination of opposition voices and freedom of expression were 
negatively affected by the increasing pressure and restrictive measures. Criminal cases and 
convictions of journalists, human rights defenders, lawyers, writers, opposition politicians, 
students and social media users continued.  
There was further serious backsliding in the area of freedom of assembly and association in 
light of recurrent bans, disproportionate interventions and excessive use of force in peaceful 
demonstrations, investigations, administrative fines and prosecutions against demonstrators 
on charges of terrorism-related activities. Legislation and its implementation are not in line 
with the Turkish Constitution, European standards or with international conventions.  


===== PAGE 8 =====
 
6 
 
The rights of the most disadvantaged groups and of persons belonging to minorities need 
better protection. Roma remained largely excluded from formal jobs and their living 
conditions severely deteriorated. Gender-based violence, discrimination, hate speech against 
minorities, in particular against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and queer 
(LGBTIQ) persons are still a matter of serious concern.  
On migration and asylum policy, Turkey made some progress. After the incidents of March 
2020 when Turkey actively encouraged migrants and refugees to take the land route to Europe 
through Greece, the situation has eventually de-escalated. Some progress was made on 
strengthening surveillance and protection capacity of the eastern land border. The EU-Turkey 
Statement of March 2016 continued to deliver results and Turkey continued to play a key role 
in ensuring effective management of migratory flows along the eastern Mediterranean route. 
The return of irregular migrants from the Greek islands under the EU-Turkey Statement 
remained however suspended by Turkey citing COVID-19 restrictions. However, 
resettlements from Turkey to the EU resumed in July 2020 despite restrictions. Although the 
volume of irregular arrivals to Greece fell, smuggling routes to Italy and to the government-
controlled areas of Cyprus were increasingly used. Turkey has still not implemented the 
provisions relating to third-country nationals in the EU-Turkey readmission agreement, 
despite these entering into force in October 2017. Overall, the number of illegal border 
crossings between Turkey and Greece still remained significantly lower than it was prior to 
the adoption of the EU-Turkey Statement. 
Turkey continued to make significant efforts to host and meet the needs of the largest refugee 
community in the world. The full operational budget of EUR 6 billion under the Facility for 
Refugees was contracted by the end of 2020 and over EUR 4.2 billion was disbursed by 
August 2021. Efficient integration measures are necessary to address the extended presence of 
refugees in the country. Access to public health for migrants and refugees should be 
increased. No outstanding visa liberalisation benchmarks were fulfilled. Turkey still needs to 
further align its legislation with the EU acquis on visa policy.  
Turkey’s increasingly assertive foreign policy continued to collide with EU priorities under 
the CFSP, notably due to its support for military action in the Caucasus, Syria and Iraq. While 
the institutional framework enabling Turkey's participation in the CFSP and the Common 
Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) is in place, Turkey maintained a very low alignment rate 
of around 14 %. Turkey’s military support in Libya, including the deployment of foreign 
fighters on the ground, and its persistent criticism of, and lack of cooperation with Operation 
IRINI, are detrimental to the EU’s effective contribution to the UN arms embargo 
implementation, and have led to conflicting approaches on Libya. Turkey wants to see 
a stable and prosperous Syria, an objective it shares with the EU. However, Turkey pursued 
its own military action in northern Syria, including through Turkish-backed militias. At the 
same time, Turkey increased the provision of basic services and extended its infrastructure 
networks in northern Syria. 
In November 2020, the Council extended the duration of the existing framework for 
restrictive measures in response to Turkey’s unauthorised drilling activities in the Eastern 
Mediterranean. In its conclusions of December 2020, the European Council strongly 
condemned Turkey’s unilateral actions, provocations and escalated rhetoric against the EU, 
EU Member States and European Leaders. The tensions in the Eastern Mediterranean 
decreased as from the beginning of 2021. Turkey stopped its illegal hydrocarbon exploration 
activities in the maritime zones  of Greece and Cyprus. However, in early October Turkish 
warships obstructed the vessel Nautical Geo from conducting a survey in the Cypriot 
Exclusive Economic Zone, and Turkey issued a NAVTEX for conducting seismic surveys 
which would encompass parts of Cyprus’ EEZ. Furthermore, Turkey continued undertaking 


===== PAGE 9 =====
 
7 
 
actions towards changing the status of the fenced-off city of Varosha with unacceptable 
unilateral decisions which go against the relevant UN SC Resolutions 550 (1984) and 789 
(1992). The EU has strongly condemned Turkey’s unilateral steps and the unacceptable 
announcements made by the Turkish President and the leader of the Turkish Cypriot 
community on 20 July 2021 on the further reopening of the fenced-off town of Varosha in 
Cyprus, and called for the immediate reversal of these actions and the reversal of all steps 
taken on Varosha since October 2020. 
The EU has repeatedly stressed the need for Turkey to respect the sovereign rights of EU 
Member States, which include entering into bilateral agreements and exploring and exploiting 
their natural resources in accordance with the EU acquis and international law, including the 
UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. Turkey needs to commit itself unequivocally to good 
neighbourly relations, international agreements and to the peaceful settlement of disputes in 
accordance with the United Nations Charter, having recourse, if necessary, to the International 
Court of Justice.  
Turkey failed to ensure full and non-discriminatory implementation of the Additional Protocol 
to the EU-Turkey Association Agreement and the removal of all the obstacles to the free 
movement of goods, including restrictions on direct transport links with Cyprus. There was no 
progress on normalising bilateral relations with the Republic of Cyprus and the informal talks 
in April 2021 failed to pave the way for the resumption of formal negotiations.  
The March 2021 and the June 2021 European Council recalled the European Union’s strategic 
interest in a stable and secure environment in the Eastern Mediterranean and in the 
development of a cooperative and mutually beneficial relationship with Turkey. In light of the 
discontinuation of illegal drilling activities, the resumption of bilateral talks between Greece 
and Turkey and the forthcoming, at that time, talks on the Cyprus problem under the auspices 
of the United Nations, the leaders offered to nurture a more positive dynamic in EU-Turkey 
relations. To this end, they expressed readiness to engage with Turkey in a phased, 
proportionate and reversible manner in a number of areas of common interest, subject to 
Turkey meeting the established conditionalities set out in previous European Council 
conclusions, and provided that the de-escalation in the Eastern Mediterranean is sustained. 
The leaders called on Turkey to abstain from renewed provocations or unilateral actions in 
breach of international law. Taking into account the Joint Communication, they reaffirmed the 
determination of the European Union, in case of such action, to use the instruments and 
options at its disposal to defend its interests and those of its Member States as well as to 
uphold regional stability. 
Turkey continued to assert the validity of the Turkish-Libyan maritime delimitation and 
military agreements of 2019. The EU considers this an infringement of the sovereign rights of 
third States, not complying with the Law of the Sea and having no legal consequences for 
third States.  
Regarding the economic criteria, the Turkish economy is well advanced, but made no 
progress over the reporting period and serious concerns persist over its functioning. The 
authorities issued a sizeable and wide-ranging set of measures to boost domestic demand and 
soften the economic repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, the economy 
rebounded quickly from the crisis, reaching pre-crisis levels already in the third quarter of 
2020. Amid a strong policy response to the crisis, institutional and policy coordination 
weaknesses undermined the credibility and effectiveness of authorities’ actions and the 
imbalances increased. The macroeconomic policy mix relied too heavily on the credit 
channel, while direct fiscal support measures were rather limited in view of the magnitude of 
the social and labour market challenges. The strong monetary expansion last year weakened 


===== PAGE 10 =====
 
8 
 
the lira, increased inflation and dollarization, and triggered portfolio outflows. The closing of 
the current account deficit in 2019 turned out to be short-lived and external imbalances 
remain a major vulnerability. Monetary policy tightened in autumn 2020 but the abrupt 
dismissal of the central bank governor in March 2021, only four months after his 
appointment, stirred financial market instability and called into question the authorities’ 
commitment to reducing inflation. 
The institutional and regulatory environment weakened further and there are persistent issues 
with the predictability, transparency, and implementation of regulations. Market exit remained 
costly and slow. The informal sector declined during the crisis but still accounts for a large 
part of the economy. State intervention in price setting mechanisms persists. The provision of 
State aid lacks proper rules on implementation, enforcement and transparency. Supported by 
loose monetary policy until the autumn 2020 and favourable regulatory measures, bank 
lending grew strongly, spurred in particular by state-owned banks. The banking sector 
remained well capitalised, benefiting from regulatory forbearance and other crisis-mitigation 
measures. The pandemic had a deeply negative impact on the labour market and on poverty. 
The number of discouraged workers increased significantly and employment levels fell far 
below from where they were a few years ago. Female labour market participation and 
employment remained at particularly low levels. The proportion of young people not in 
employment, education or training increased. 
Turkey made limited progress and has a good level of preparation in achieving the capacity to 
cope with the competitive pressure and market forces within the EU. Despite some progress 
made in improving access to education, the mismatch between the education system and 
labour market needs persists. Expenditure on research and development continued increasing 
at a slow pace, but remained well below the government’s target. Supported by favourable 
financing conditions and concessional lending, investment activity rebounded in 2020. 
Progress was made with regard to the diversification of energy supplies and the development 
of the renewable energy sector. The extension of local content requirement practices 
continued to raise concerns. The relative share of the EU in Turkey’s foreign trade slightly 
increased, despite extensive deviations by Turkey from its obligations under the EU-Turkey 
Customs Union. 
Regarding its ability to assume the obligations of membership, Turkey’s alignment with 
the EU acquis was very limited and pursued on a rather ad hoc basis. 
The internal market cluster is key to the good functioning of the Customs Union and to 
integrating Turkey in the EU’s single market. Turkey has achieved a good level of preparation 
for the free movement of goods. Although it continued to align with technical EU legislation 
under the ‘New and Global Approach’, technical barriers to trade remain, which hamper the 
good functioning of the Customs Union. Preparations in the areas of freedom of movement 
for workers and right of establishment and freedom to provide services are at an early stage as 
many professions are closed to EU nationals. Turkey is moderately prepared on free 
movement of capital notably because of the substantial remaining obstacles for acquisitions of 
assets and real estate. It improved its legal framework regulating the fight against money 
laundering and terrorism financing. It has reached a good level of preparation in terms of the 
legislative alignment of consumer and health protection, as exemplified by Turkey’s strong 
vaccination campaign against COVID-19. However, in both areas, there is a need to 
strengthen administrative capacity, consultations and coordination among stakeholders. 
Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of competition policy. There is a continued 
lack of State aid implementation rules, enforcement and transparency, while the institutional 
set up remains incomplete. In the cluster on competitiveness and inclusive growth, there has 
been mostly backsliding on the economic-related chapters. This was notably the case on 


===== PAGE 11 =====
 
9 
 
enterprise and industrial policy, mainly due to Turkey bringing in measures incompatible with 
EU industrial policy principles, and on economic and monetary policy, reflecting intensified 
political pressure on the central bank. There was also backsliding in the area of social policy 
and employment, linked to the curtailment of trade union rights, the lack of genuine social 
dialogue and persistent levels of informal economic activity. On taxation, while Turkey is 
moderately prepared, there is a need for a clear strategy, avoiding frequent changes in tax 
rates and enabling tax information exchange with all EU Member States. Turkey maintains a 
good level of preparation for the customs union but made limited progress, including in its 
implementation. Turkey’s deviations from its obligations under the EU-Turkey Customs 
Union continue, contributing to a high number of trade irritants. Turkey has some level of 
preparation in the area of information society and media. It continued backsliding, mostly due 
to inadequate competition, concentration of media ownership and the lack of independence of 
regulatory authorities. Turkey’s preparations in the area of science and research are well 
advanced and it continued to implement the action plan to boost the national research and 
innovation capacity and to align with the European Research Area (ERA). Turkey is 
moderately prepared on education and culture, and needs to further improve inclusive 
education, with a particular focus on girls and children from disadvantaged groups. 
Regarding the cluster on the Green Agenda and Sustainable Connectivity, Turkey is 
moderately prepared in transport and energy policies. It has made some progress on energy 
and transport networks, with the construction of the Halkali-Kapikule railway line connecting 
the Bulgarian border to Istanbul continuing. Turkey has some level of preparation on 
environmental and climate change and faces critical environmental and climate challenges, 
both as regards mitigation and adaptation. It made some progress, including the ratification of 
the Paris Agreement on climate change and increasing capacity in waste management, 
wastewater treatment and on legislative alignment, but enforcement and implementation 
remain weak. Turkey needs to follow up with an enhanced nationally determined contribution 
under the Paris Agreement, long-term strategic decarbonisation and adaptation plans and 
appropriate legislation reflecting them domestically. . 
On the cluster covering resources, agriculture and cohesion, Turkey reached some level of 
preparation in the area of agriculture and rural development. However, there was backsliding  
over the reporting period, as its agricultural policy diverged from the main principles of the 
EU common agricultural policy. Turkey is a major exporter of food products to the EU, and 
made limited progress in the area of food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy. Turkey 
needs to make further progress on meeting EU standards, particularly on pesticide residues. It 
made good progress on fisheries in implementing the fisheries law, resources and fleet 
management, and inspection and control. Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of 
regional policy and the coordination of structural instruments. Overall, it made some progress 
in this area, especially in accelerating the absorption of IPA II funds and in addressing some 
structural weaknesses. Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of financial and 
budgetary provisions and made limited progress during the reporting period to strengthen 
administrative capacity or to design implementing rules for the correct application of the own 
resources system. 
Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of external relations, notably due to the continuing 
deviations from the Common Customs Tariff and the common commercial policy. It made 
limited progress in the reporting period, when it successfully concluded a trade agreement 
with the UK after the EU-UK agreement. Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of 
foreign, security and defence policy. There was backsliding in the framework of political 
dialogue on foreign and security policy as Turkey’s increasingly assertive foreign policy 
collided with the EU priorities under the common foreign and security policy. 


===== PAGE 12 =====
 
10 
 
Overall, in many areas further significant efforts are needed on legislative alignment with the 
EU acquis. In all areas, implementation and enforcement needs substantial improvement. 
Ensuring the independence of regulatory authorities and developing administrative capacity 
are key for Turkey to achieve further progress. 
2. 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS  
2.1. 
       Functioning of democratic institutions and Public Administration   Reform  
2.1.1. Democracy 
There are serious deficiencies in the functioning of Turkey’s democratic institutions. 
Democratic backsliding as well as deep political polarisation continued during the reporting 
period. Structural deficiencies of the presidential system remained in place. Despite ending 
the state of emergency in July 2018, certain legal provisions granting extraordinary powers to 
government authorities and retaining several restrictive elements of the emergency rule 
remained integrated into law. In July 2021, Turkey's Parliament approved a bill that extends 
the duration of these restrictive elements of the state of emergency for one more year. The 
Inquiry Commission on the State of Emergency has not yet finalised the examination of its 
caseload concerning the public servants who were dismissed by decree during the emergency 
rule. This prevented them from launching appeal procedures. 
Elections 
No elections were held in the reporting period. In the south-east, mayors, elected in 2019 and 
forcefully dismissed, continued to be replaced by government-appointed trustees, which is a 
source of significant concern as it undermines local democracy and denies citizens their 
chosen representation. The new human rights action plan foresees changes to the legislation 
on political parties and elections, which provides an opportunity to bring Turkish legislation 
in line with international obligations and standards for conducting democratic elections. 
Turkey needs to take steps to improve the broader environment for elections.  
The legal framework for elections and political parties remains problematic and needs to be 
aligned with the outstanding recommendations of the Office for Democratic Institutions and 
Human Rights (ODIHR) and the Venice Commission. Turkey also needs to address broader 
questions with regard to democratic media plurality and provide equal and fair conditions to 
all political parties and candidates.  
The human rights action plan announced in March 2021 foresees changes to the legislation 
on political parties and elections. This represents an important opportunity as past elections 
were marked by undue restrictions of certain fundamental freedoms, including the right to 
vote and be elected and the freedom of expression. Turkey should introduce key amendments 
to the election legislation with proper consultation, which would provide stability of the legal 
framework in line with international good practice.  
In the south-east, 48 mayors had been forcefully dismissed and replaced by government-
appointed trustees, denying citizens their chosen representation. No steps were taken to 
address the June 2020 opinion of the Venice Commission, according to which decisions to 
deny mayoral mandates to HDP candidates who received the highest number of votes at the 
municipal elections of March 2019 in six municipalities and to give these mandates to second-
placed AKP candidates, were deemed not consistent with international norms and standards, 
and should be reversed. The Venice Commission further emphasised that, while the removal 
of elected officials may exceptionally be justified by the need to prevent officials from 


===== PAGE 13 =====
 
11 
 
abusing their office to favour terrorist activities, replacing elected officials by candidates who 
lost the election, without repeating elections, cannot be justified on this basis. 
 
Parliament 
The presidential system has largely weakened the Parliament’s legislative and oversight 
functions. The President possessed vast legislative powers and continued to curtail the 
legislative role of the Parliament through presidential decrees and decisions regulating key 
policy areas. Policy deliberations forging cross-party consensus rarely occurred. The 
Parliament continued to lack the necessary means to hold the government accountable. 
Targeting of the opposition parties continued, including by the Constitutional Court’s 
acceptance of an indictment by the Chief Public Prosecutor of the Court of Cassation seeking 
to close down the second largest opposition party, which contributed to the weakening of 
political pluralism in Turkey. 
Inter-party electoral alliances were sustained in the Parliament. The parliamentary majority of 
the ruling AKP-led alliance marked the Parliament’s legislative and agenda-setting functions. 
Opposition parties failed to exert influence in parliamentary discussions. Key public policy 
discussions forging cross-party compromises very seldom occurred within the Parliament. 
The presidential system has weakened the Parliament’s legislative function, in particular 
due to the extensive use of Presidential decrees and decisions. During the reporting period, the 
Parliament adopted 61 pieces of legislation out of the 821 proposed bills. 77 presidential 
decrees were issued on a wide range of policy areas including in the socio-economic policy 
areas, which do not fall within the remit of presidential decrees.  
As an example, the withdrawal from the Istanbul Convention, which had been unanimously 
ratified by the Parliament in 2011, was implemented by a presidential decision, without any 
involvement of the Parliament. 
Parliamentary oversight of the executive remained very weak. The Parliament lacks the 
necessary means to hold the government to account. Members of Parliament can only address 
written questions to the Cabinet members. They cannot ask questions to the President. 
Presidential decrees remained exempt from parliamentary control. Parliamentary oversight of 
public spending needs to be improved.  
The judiciary systematically targeted parliamentarians from the opposition parties on the 
account of alleged terrorism-related offenses. Currently, 4 000 HDP members and officials 
remain in prison, including a number of parliamentarians. In June 2021, the Justice Ministry’s 
prosecutors submitted to the Turkish Grand National Assembly summaries of proceedings 
seeking to lift the legislative immunity of 20 opposition lawmakers from six different 
opposition parties. The parliamentary immunity system did not provide adequate legal 
protection that would allow the parliamentarians from the opposition to express their opinions 
within the boundaries of freedom of speech.  
Legal actions against representatives of the opposition parties, notably the People’s 
Democratic Party (HDP), increasingly endangered political pluralism. In the current 
legislative term, four opposition deputies were stripped of their immunities and arrested due 
to terrorism-related charges. One of them re-gained his parliamentary status after his appeal to 
the Constitutional Court. Two former co-chairs Selahattin Demirtaş and Figen Yüksekdağ and 
other former HDP deputies remained in jail. 
In June 2021, the Constitutional Court accepted an indictment seeking the closure of the HDP. 
The Prosecutor alleged that the HDP became the focus of activities aiming to disrupt the 


===== PAGE 14 =====
 
12 
 
indivisible integrity of the State with its nation by acting as an extension of the Kurdistan 
Workers’ Party (PKK). The prosecutor also sought a political ban of 451 HDP members and 
a freeze of the party’s bank account. The move to close down the second largest opposition 
party appears to be politically motivated and seriously undermines the legitimacy of the 
Turkish democratic institutions and political pluralism in the country.  
The legal framework for elections and political parties remains problematic. The 10 % 
electoral threshold is the highest among Council of Europe members. It contradicts the case 
law of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) and hinders the representation of many 
Turkish voters. Turkey did not take any step to align with the outstanding recommendations 
of the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights and the Venice 
Commission (see also Elections). 
Representation of women in Parliament remained low (17.32 %). Despite the Committee on 
Equality of Opportunity for Women and Men and some individual deputies’ efforts, the 
Parliament did not prioritise advancing gender equality across the country.  
Governance 
The presidential system continues to be characterised by a lack of checks and balances and 
by politicisation of the public administration. Most regulatory authorities remain directly 
linked to the Presidency. The recommendations of the Council of Europe Venice 
Commission on the presidential regime still need to be addressed. Pressure on mayors from 
opposition parties by the ruling coalition government further weakened local democracy.  
The presidential system remained characterised by a lack of the necessary checks and 
balances required to safeguard against an excessive concentration of power in one office and 
to ensure the independence of the judiciary, as highlighted in the 2017 opinion of the Venice 
Commission. The presidential system negatively affected the functioning of the branches of 
government and the state administration. The President’s political accountability is limited to 
elections, due to a lack of effective checks and balances.  
The use of traditional instruments of oversight of the executive by Parliament, such as 
a vote of confidence and the possibility of oral questions to the executive, is still not possible; 
only written questions can be addressed to the Vice-President and ministers. The politicisation 
of the administration, judiciary and the security sector further increased. Most of the key 
institutions are directly attached to the Presidency. The civil service has been politicised, 
especially in the senior managerial levels. 
The legal framework enabled undue political influence over regulatory authorities. Most 
regulatory authorities remain directly linked to the Presidency and the President has the power 
to nominate the heads of the vast majority of the public regulatory authorities. During the 
reporting period, the President dismissed twice the governor of the Central Bank. 
Despite the increase in the caseload of the Ombudsman, the institution remained silent on 
politically critical issues concerning fundamental rights. The Ombudsman still lacks ex officio 
powers to initiate investigations and to intervene in cases with legal remedies.  
Local government 
The pressure of the government over opposition mayors further intensified. Mayors of the 
opposition parties faced politically motivated administrative and judicial investigations. The 
Court of Cassation upheld the prison sentence for the Istanbul provincial chair of the main 
opposition Republican People’s Party (CHP), Canan Kaftancıoğlu, who was charged for her 
social media posts.  


===== PAGE 15 =====
 
13 
 
The situation of local democracy in the south-east further deteriorated. 48 HDP mayors were 
removed from office on grounds of terrorism-related changes since the local elections in 
2019. Additionally, one CHP mayor in the region of Izmir was replaced due to alleged links 
to the Gülen movement. Governors, as trustees, continued to hold the posts of the dismissed 
mayors. In most cases, the incoming trustees have kept the municipal assemblies suspended. 
Hundreds of local politicians and elected office holders were arrested on terrorism-related 
charges. All these measures ran counter to the basic premises of democracy by denying 
citizens their chosen representation. According to the Venice Commission, the voters’ choice 
needs to be restored either by reinstating the suspended mayors or determination of acting 
mayors by the elected municipal assemblies or by organising repeat elections. 
A lawsuit was filed against İstanbul Metropolitan Mayor Ekrem İmamoğlu on the grounds 
that in his press release of November 2019 he allegedly insulted the members of the Supreme 
Election Council (YSK) after the İstanbul elections had been cancelled. 
The legal framework regulating the Ministry of Interior’s tutelary powers over elected local 
office holders was not revised in line with Turkey’s commitments under the European Charter 
of Local Self-Government.  
The municipal law envisages local administrations' engagement with citizens and civil 
society. Citizens’ assemblies, which aim to bring together professional and civil society 
organisations and other local stakeholders, remained inactive in most provinces. Some 
municipalities increased their level of transparency and accountability through innovative 
solutions, such as live broadcasting of municipal tenders. 
The representation of women at local level continued to be low. Only 2 of 30 (6.6 %) 
metropolitan mayors and 42 of 1 389 (3 %) mayors are women.  
Civil Society 
Serious backsliding regarding the civil society environment continued. Civil society faced 
continuous pressure and their space to operate freely has continued to diminish, limiting their 
freedom of expression and freedom of association. Turkey did not implement the ECtHR 
judgement, which ruled for the immediate release of Osman Kavala, a prominent human 
rights defender. His continued pre-trial detention, further prolonged on 1 September 2021, had 
a deterrent effect on the work of the civil society at large. Human rights organisations, which 
were closed under the state of emergency, were not offered any legal remedy in relation to 
confiscations.  
The new law on preventing financing of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction raises 
concerns with regard to possible restrictions on the activities of human rights defenders and 
civil society.  
Despite all impediments, civil society remained vocal, involved in civic life and reported on 
developments as much as possible. Systematic and inclusive mechanisms for consulting a 
wide spectrum of rights based civil society organisations, notably on new legislation and 
policies need to be in place.  
A powerful and diverse civil society is a crucial component of any democratic system and 
should be acknowledged and treated as such by the state institutions. Civil society 
organisations in Turkey continued to make crucial contributions on key challenges facing the 
country, notably in the areas of education, anti-discrimination, female workforce 
participation, awareness-raising regarding ethnic and social tolerance, hate crimes monitoring 
and support for refugees. Civil society working in the area of human rights faced increased 
pressure, in particular following detentions and arrests of activists and human rights 


===== PAGE 16 =====
 
14 
 
defenders. Court cases with severe sentences and frequent investigations led to increased 
challenges and a hostile environment for the civil society. 
The ongoing court case of prominent human rights defender Osman Kavala, held in pre-trial 
detention since November 2017, is deeply worrying in view of the relevant ECtHR judgment, 
which became final in May 2020. The judgement underlined that in addition to violating 
Osman Kavala’s right to liberty and security, his pre-trial detention is serving ulterior 
purpose, namely to silence him and dissuade other human rights defenders, contrary to Article 
18 of the ECHR. The Council of Europe urged the Turkish authorities to ensure Osman 
Kavala’s immediate release. In December 2020, the Constitutional Court rejected for the 
second time the individual application from Osman Kavala concluding that his right to 
personal liberty and security had not been violated. As underlined by the Commissioner for 
Human Rights, the decision of the Istanbul 13th Assize Court of 1 September 2021 to prolong 
the detention of Mr Osman Kavala perpetuates the violation of both his human rights and of 
Turkey’s obligation to abide by a final judgment of the European Court of Human Rights. 
Another symbolic case against human rights defenders, the Büyükada case was pending 
before the Court of Cassation.  
Portrayal in some media outlets of some of activists as criminals, including for accepting 
funds from international donors remains a matter of serious concern. Defamatory rhetoric by 
public officials casts serious doubt on the respect for a fair trial and the presumption of 
innocence.  
The pressure faced by female politicians and women’s organisations activists characterised by 
frequent detention, investigation, and arrest created a serious hurdle for the exercise of 
freedom of association, freedom of expression, and for participation in political life. 
Discriminatory discourse and hate speech targeting LGBTIQ community increased. 
International non-governmental organisations, including those providing humanitarian aid to 
refugees, also faced difficulties in their work in Turkey. No effective domestic remedy was 
provided for the confiscation of assets from civil society organisations closed by emergency 
decrees. 
The legal framework regulating the work of civil society organisations lacks clarity in terms 
of the distribution of responsibilities among public institutions as well as arbitrariness in the 
implementation of the relevant legislation. It was still compulsory for all associations to 
register all their members in the information system of the Ministry of Interior. This legal 
obligation is not in line with the OSCE/Council of Europe guidelines on freedom of 
association. The overly broad definition of terrorism and its interpretation by the judiciary has 
a worrisome deterrent effect on civil society. 
The law on preventing financing of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction came into 
force in December 2020 after a speedy parliamentary procedure without any prior 
consultation and public debate. Three UN Special Rapporteurs, among many national and 
international stakeholders, shared their concerns over the law and argued that it might pose 
new limitations to freedom of association and has a negative impact on fundraising. The 
Venice Commission, while fully recognising Turkey’s difficult security situation, also shared 
these concerns. It underlined that the introduced measures go beyond what is necessary and 
proportional, and some of them will have a chilling effect on NGOs. The law on collection of 
aid continues to impose burdensome requirements for permits that discourage fundraising 
activities by civil society organisations. These include prior notification for each fundraising 
activity and lengthy authorisation processes. Public funds are not distributed in a transparent 
way and the distribution process does not allow for the full involvement of civil society 
organisations and other stakeholders at every stage. The existing tax system impedes the 


===== PAGE 17 =====
 
15 
 
functioning and development of foundations and associations. The status of ‘public benefit’ 
for associations and ‘tax exemption’ for foundations is vaguely defined and granted by the 
President. The space for foreign donors, which provide financial support to civil society in 
Turkey under current Turkish legislation, is increasingly shrinking.  
Other barriers to civil society and freedom of association remain, notably cumbersome 
administrative procedures and repetitive frequent inspections and fines. Provisions restricting 
registration, procedures for obtaining required permits and the functioning of associations 
need to be revised, including facilitating the activities of international and national NGOs 
working with refugees and migrants in Turkey. 
There is still no comprehensive government strategy or mechanism in place for cooperation 
with civil society or for improving the legal framework. Nor is there any legal framework or 
transparent and consistent practice for public consultations. Independent civil society 
organisations are largely excluded from the consultations that are part of policy-making 
processes and monitoring. It is crucial that the elements of full participatory approach are 
adopted for a functioning democracy. Overall, the legal, financial and administrative 
environment needs to be more conducive to developing civil society in Turkey. 
Civilian oversight of the security forces 
The legal and institutional framework governing the security and intelligence sector remained 
unchanged, with strengthened civilian oversight under the presidential system. Broad powers 
over the security forces lie within the executive branch. During the reporting period, the 
government took steps to further consolidate civilian control of the security forces. As of 
March 2021, the Ministry of Defence was entitled to propose military personnel’s promotion 
and appointment, a legal mandate that previously belonged to the General Staff.  
However, the transparency and accountability of military, police and intelligence services 
remained very limited. The culture of impunity remained prevalent and the security personnel 
continued to enjoy significant judicial and administrative shelters in cases of alleged human 
right violations and disproportionate use of force. In June 2021, the Parliament adopted a law 
introducing legal shelters and exceptions to the military personnel. Except the cases of in 
flagrante delicto, the investigation of offences committed by the military staff is subject to 
prior authorisation. The parliamentary oversight of the security agencies was ineffective. The 
legal framework for overseeing military expenditure was not improved.  
There were further dismissals and arrests of officers in relation to the coup attempt of July 
2016.  
Situation in the east and south-east 
The situation in the south-east remained very worrying. The government carried out domestic 
and cross-border security and military operations in Iraq and Syria. The security situation 
remained precarious in border areas with recurrent terrorist acts by the Kurdistan Workers’ 
Party (PKK), which remains on the EU list of persons, groups and entities involved in acts of 
terrorism. The EU unambiguously condemned the PKK’s attacks and expressed solidarity 
with the families of the victims. While the government has a legitimate right to fight 
terrorism, it is essential that it does so in accordance with the rule of law, human rights and 
fundamental freedoms. Anti-terror measures need to be proportionate. There were no 
developments on the resumption of a credible political process to achieve a peaceful and 
sustainable solution. 


===== PAGE 18 =====
 
16 
 
Visits by his family and lawyers to life-sentence serving PKK leader Öcalan were allowed 
only intermittently. There were renewed hunger strikes in several prisons demanding an end 
to Öcalan’s isolation and protesting against human rights violations in prisons.  
Provincial governorates declared recurrent military security zones in rural settlements. The 
curfew in six districts of Diyarbakir's Sur municipality, in place since December 2015, was 
not lifted. The Venice Commission’s opinion on the legal framework governing curfews are 
yet to be implemented. Investigations into the deaths of civilians during security operations 
under curfews in 2015-2016 in towns such as Cizre did not progress.  
Human rights organisations and opposition parties reported serious violations of human rights 
by security forces, including alleged instances of torture, ill-treatment, arbitrary arrests and 
procedural rights violations in prisons and in police and gendarmerie establishments.  
Eastern and south-eastern provincial governors declared frequent blanket bans on all 
demonstrations and events, with the longest repeated ban in Van in force since 2016. A very 
broad interpretation of the fight against terrorism, growing restrictions imposed on the rights 
of journalists, political opponents, bar associations and human rights defenders working on 
the Kurdish issue raised repeated concerns. Associations, Kurdish-language media outlets, 
and cultural rights institutions remained mostly closed. In April 2021, the Constitutional 
Court annulled a provision of the emergency decree that set the basis for the closures of media 
outlets on the ground of "posing a threat to national security” in 2016. The Constitutional 
Court also reversed a provision that paved the way for the seizure of the properties of those 
that were shut down. 
Attempts to link the HDP to a terrorist organisation, and prosecute it accordingly, intensified. 
In June, the Constitutional Court accepted an indictment demanding to close down the HDP, 
seeking political ban for 451 HDP executives, including the party’s co-chairs and all past and 
present members of Parliament and executives as well as a freeze on the party’s bank 
accounts. There were hundreds of new detentions and arrests of elected representatives and 
mayors, municipal council members and municipal executives in the east and south-east of 
Turkey on terrorism-related charges. Requests by the prosecution in the Parliament to lift the 
immunity of almost all HDP lawmakers are pending. Former HDP co-chair Selahattin 
Demirtaş was not released from prison despite two final ECtHR judgements ruling for his 
immediate release. The Constitutional Court’s ruling of June 2020 on the violation of 
Demirtaş’s right to liberty and security was not implemented.  
Overall, 48 elected mayors were replaced by state appointed trustees, out of the 65 
municipalities won by the HDP in the March 2019 local elections. Since the first trustee 
appointment in June 2019, 83 co-mayors were detained. Currently six HDP co-mayors are in 
prison, and five co-mayors are under house arrest. In metropolitan municipalities alone, 
almost 100 elected municipal assembly members were suspended. These dismissals and 
arrests triggered reactions across the political landscape and civil society, as well as from the 
international community. As a long-standing member of the Council of Europe and 
a candidate country, Turkey must safeguard its democratic system, including the freedom of 
political association. 
Court cases launched against government-funded construction projects on cultural, historical, 
and religious heritage sites damaged in 2015 and 2016 are ongoing. There were renewed 
tensions around several projects, which are considered to be culturally and environmentally 
destructive, such as the mining project in Tunceli Mountains, which is part of a national park 
and a sacred site for Alevis. The Ilisu Dam on the Tigris River flooded most of the historic 
town in Hasankeyf and surrounding sites, natural habitats and historical heritage. The serious 
risk of such damages had been raised for years by residents and activists.  


===== PAGE 19 =====
 
17 
 
There was still no comprehensive, consistent approach in place in relation to missing persons, 
to the exhumation of mass graves or to the independent investigation of all alleged cases of 
extrajudicial killing by security and law enforcement officers. Most of the investigations into 
cases of enforced disappearance from the 1990s have faced the 20-year statute of limitations. 
Out of more than 1 400 cases of missing persons, only 16 court cases have been launched. 14 
ended in acquittals of the alleged perpetrators, two are ongoing and two other cases are before 
the Court of Cassation.  
Refugees and internally displaced persons  
Turkey continues to host the largest number of refugees worldwide. According to Turkey’s 
Directorate-General of Migration Management, Turkey hosted 3 670 342 Syrian refugees 
with temporary protection status, some 92 000 Syrians with legal residency and 110 000 
Syrians with Turkish citizenship. The number of Syrian refugees who voluntarily returned to 
Syria from Turkey stood at 420 000 according to the Turkish government. Besides the Syrian 
refugees, Turkey hosts 320 000 asylum-seekers and refugees from countries including Iraq, 
Afghanistan, Iran and Somalia as of January 2021, according to the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees.  
In 2020, Turkey granted international protection (refugee status, conditional refugee status or, 
subsidiary protection) to 8 753 applicants (5 449 in 2019). The authorities rejected 10 674  
applications compared with 5 212 in 2019. The backlog of international protection 
applications remains high. Human rights organisations and lawyers reported challenges with 
access to registration in several provinces. Barriers to registration compound vulnerability of 
applicants as they increase the risk of detention and deportation. In December 2020, 886 653 
foreign nationals holding residence permits were present in Turkey, including humanitarian 
residence holders.  
Turkey continued to refuse to resume the readmission of returnees from the Greek islands, 
interrupted in March 2020, citing COVID-19 restrictions despite the European Commission’s 
repeated requests to fully implement all the provisions of the EU-Turkey Statement. However, 
resettlement of Syrians from Turkey to the EU Member States resumed in July 2020 with the 
necessary health precautions in place. 
Disaggregated data on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on refugees was not available. 
The pandemic had a disproportionately negative effect on vulnerable groups including 
refugees and internally displaced persons, who were already living in dire economic 
conditions. Many refugees lost jobs in the informal sectors of the economy. Others continued 
to be exploited in the informal economy and their poverty and unregistered status inhibited 
access to health care, social security, benefits and other services. Administrative requirements, 
restrictions on the freedom of movement and prejudice were among the main obstacles to 
secure a formal (legal) employment.   
Turkey made sustained significant efforts to provide support for refugees and ensure wider 
access to healthcare and schooling, with 768 839 children enrolled in formal education by 
December 2020, compared to 684 728 children in 2019. However, more than 400 000 school-
aged refugee children were still out-of-school and did not have any access to education 
opportunities. Syrian refugees continued to benefit from free-of-charge healthcare provided in 
177 Migrant Health Centres funded by the EU through its Facility for Refugees in Turkey and 
in Turkish hospitals. Many cities continued to enhance municipal services and infrastructure 
to respond to the population increase as a result of the influx of refugees.  
Turkey needs to further align its practice with European standards in removal centres, in 
particular with regard to protection of human rights, including access to legal counselling and 


===== PAGE 20 =====
 
18 
 
interpreters and protection of vulnerable groups, in particular children staying with their 
families.  
There was limited progress on the situation of internally displaced persons resulting from the 
violence in the south-east in the 1990s and in more recent years. The COVID-19 pandemic 
exacerbated economic exclusion and deteriorating living conditions for internally displaced 
persons. 
2.1.2. Public Administration Reform 
  
Turkey has some level of preparation/is moderately prepared in the field of public 
administration reform. There was no progress during the reporting period. Overall, the 
country lacks a comprehensive public administration reform agenda and a relevant leading 
institution in charge. Concerns remained over the accountability of the administration and 
human resources management. The political will to reform is still lacking. Policymaking is 
not evidence-based or participatory. The politicisation of the administration continued. 
Women’s representation remained low in the higher echelons of the bureaucracy. Last year’s 
recommendations were not implemented. 
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:  
 prepare and present an inter-institutional public administration reform plan in line with 
EU principles and values, and with the necessary political ownership and support; 
 ensure that the Inquiry Commission on the State of Emergency Measures provides for an 
effective remedy, which safeguards the right of every individual to a fair administrative 
process; 
 introduce merit-based appointments and promotions for the senior managerial positions of 
the civil service.  
Strategic framework for public administration reform  
Turkey has not produced an overarching strategy or planning document on public 
administration reform. The continued absence of political support and the limited ownership 
shown by the administration have further compromised the conditions for a comprehensive 
governance reform. Several planning documents and sectoral policy documents on various 
aspects of public administration reform exist but provide only a fragmented framework. Most 
of these policy documents do not specify the expected costs of reform measures, so financial 
sustainability of public sector reforms is not guaranteed (see Chapter 32 – Financial control). 
An administrative unit legally entitled to coordinate, design, and monitor public 
administration reforms needs to be established. Such a unit would need to coordinate with the 
Ministry of Treasury and Finance, to ensure coherence of strategic and fiscal planning and 
efficiently address managerial accountability. 
Policy development and coordination  
The centralisation of policymaking under the presidential system continued. The collegiate 
decision making was further reduced by the stronger role of the Presidency. Policy 
coordination among central government institutions has remained strong in practice. The 
Presidential administration and the Presidential Councils continued to play an increasing role 
in policy making, while the policymaking role of ministries further diminished. Most 
regulatory authorities are linked by law to the Presidency. 
The link between policymaking and financial planning remains weak. An inclusive and 
evidence-based policymaking process is still absent and there is no legal obligation for the 


===== PAGE 21 =====
 
19 
 
Presidency and ministries to conduct public consultations. During the reporting period, public 
consultations seldom took place.  
Evidence-based policymaking instruments, such as regulatory impact assessments were not 
used by the executive and by the legislative branch which has no resources to conduct them. 
In the absence of systematic ex-post monitoring and public reporting on the implementation 
of key government programmes, the public scrutiny of government's work has remained 
inadequate, contributing to the lack of accountability of the administration.  
Public financial management  
Turkey continues lacking an overarching public financial management reform 
programme. The annual budget is prepared as part of the medium-term budgetary 
framework. Public procurement legislation is not in line with the EU acquis. The vast number 
of exemptions inserted into the Law on Public Procurement disrupts public transparency and 
accountability (See also Chapter 5). In the absence of adequate ex-post monitoring and 
reporting, major public investment programmes lack transparency. There is no clear strategy 
for domestic revenue mobilisation; ad hoc tax changes continued (see also Chapter 16). The 
implementation of the strategy and an action plan for the fight against the informal economy 
(2019-2021) continued at a good pace. 
As regards external audit, the Turkish Court of Accounts’ ex-post controls continued to 
provide substantive information for parliamentary oversight as well as for the public. The 
Court of Accounts’ reports produced mass media coverage about alleged corruption and 
misuse of public resources. However, there remained certain shortcomings. Under the Law on 
the Turkish Court of Accounts, certain institutions are exempted from the Court’s remit and, 
thus, from the associated parliamentary scrutiny. The parliamentary and judicial follow-up to 
audit reports need to be improved. 
The limited parliamentary oversight of the budget resulted in reduced budget transparency. 
The Turkish State Wealth Fund lacks accountability and transparency; its investments and 
borrowing is not integrated into the budget. Annual budgetary figures are aggregated and the 
budget reports are hard to comprehend. Opportunities for citizens to engage in the budgetary 
process were absent in the reporting period. 
Public service and human resources management  
The civil service remains substantially governed by the Civil Servants’ Act of 1965. The need 
for new legislation on the public service has been raised several times, but a non-systematic 
approach continued to prevail. Turkey is still missing an overall civil service strategy and 
overall monitoring report on the implementation of civil service policy. 
The civil service legal framework does not guarantee neutrality, continuity or merit-based 
recruitment and promotion procedures. Numerous reported incidents affirmed the 
politicisation of the civil service. The President dismissed two Central Bank Governors in the 
reporting period. Moreover, between March and May 2021, the President dismissed and 
replaced four of the Central Bank’s seven-member Monetary Policy Committee. The first 
phase of external recruitment for entry-level positions is based on merit, whereas the oral 
interview phase remains poorly regulated and thus open to political patronage. Nepotism was 
prevalent in the absence of competitive objective criteria for the top civil service posts and 
access to top civil service positions was prone to political interference. 
Accountability of the administration  
In the presidential system, the organisation of the state administration follows centralised 
lines of accountability to the Presidency. Accountability of agencies remains largely weak 


===== PAGE 22 =====
 
20 
 
and internal control and audit does not function effectively. Most executive institutions are 
formally embedded in ministries, although they retain autonomy over day-to-day operational 
management. The roles and responsibilities of different institutions are still not fully clear, 
which has a negative impact on efficiency, transparency and accountability.  
State institutions are required to submit annual accountability reports on the use of resources 
to achieve targets, but a systematic follow-up mechanism by the executive was not put in 
place. Institutions lack a culture of managerial accountability and delegation of 
responsibilities (see Chapter 32 - Financial control).  
Citizens’ right to good administration is formally ensured through relevant internal and 
external oversight arrangements, such as internal audit and control units, and the Turkish 
Court of Accounts. The impact of the control functions was however limited. The role of 
oversight institutions such as the Ombudsman remained limited in the absence of ex officio 
powers (see Governance).  
The right to access public information is regulated by the Law on the Right to Information. 
There is no centralised independent body in charge of overseeing the implementation of the 
law. The law allows for broad exemptions on grounds of protecting state secrets, commercial 
secrets and personal data. The absence of a revised legislation covering those areas of 
exemption, limits the citizens’ access to information.  
Easy online access led to about 1.3 million applications for access to information in 2020, 
with 7 % of refusals. 
Concerns remain as regards the Inquiry Commission on the State of Emergency Measures. 
There are 11 544 applications pending. Strong concerns remain as to whether each case is 
being examined individually, the rights of defence of those dismissed are respected and the 
assessment procedure is in line with international standards. Since there were no hearings, 
there was a general lack of procedural rights for applicants and decisions were taken on the 
basis of the written files related to the original dismissal, all of which called into question the 
extent to which the Inquiry Commission is an effective judicial remedy. 
Service delivery to citizens and businesses  
There is still no law on general administrative procedures in Turkey. The lack of such legal 
framework makes it difficult to assess to what extent the principles of good administration are 
guaranteed and hinders work on simplifying administrative procedures as well as cutting 
red tape. In this context, citizens and businesses are faced with increasing legal uncertainty. 
There is no central policy or co-ordination mechanism for improving horizontally the overall 
quality of services. Most of the institutions developed service delivery standards within their 
own legal remit. No institution is responsible for overall promotion or measurement of the 
quality of public services. Given the particular conditions imposed by the COVID-19 
pandemic, e-government services and administrative simplification progressed further. The 
number of e-government users exceeded 54.2 million. Ministries, central government 
agencies and municipalities developed their online services. 


===== PAGE 23 =====
 
21 
 
2.2. 
 Rule of law and fundamental rights  
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights  
The EU’s founding values include the rule of law and respect for human rights. An effective 
(independent, of quality and efficient) judicial system and effective fight against corruption 
are of paramount importance, as is respect for fundamental rights in law and in practice. 
Turkey is at an early stage of applying the EU acquis and European standards in this area. 
Serious backsliding continued during the reporting period. Major issues identified in 
previous reports were not addressed, in particular the systemic lack of independence of the 
judiciary and the urgent need to improve the human rights situation. A new human rights 
action plan, while a welcomed initiative in principle, did not present concrete steps to 
remedy the most acute problems in this area.  
Undue pressure on judges and prosecutors continued to have a significant negative effect on 
the independence and the overall quality of the judiciary. The negative effects of the large-
scale dismissals of judges and prosecutors continued to weigh on the efficiency and 
professionalism of the judiciary. Turkey’s refusal to implement the rulings of the European 
Court of Human Rights further increased concerns regarding its judiciary’s adherence to the 
international and European standards. 
Corruption remained widespread and continued to be an issue of concern. There was no 
progress in addressing the many gaps in the Turkish anti-corruption framework, which is 
a sign of a lack of will to fight decisively corruption. 
Serious backsliding continued on human rights. Broad restrictions imposed on the activities 
of journalists, writers, lawyers, academics, human rights defenders and critical voices 
continued to have a negative effect on the exercise of their freedoms. Turkey’s withdrawal 
from the Istanbul Convention raised further concerns about its adherence to international 
human rights standards. The damage caused by the state of emergency on the fundamental 
rights and the related legislation adopted was not remedied.   
Functioning of the judiciary 
Turkey is at an early stage in this area. Serious backsliding continued as further judicial 
decisions contradicted the ECtHR case law. The new human rights action plan envisages 
certain measures to improve the independence of the judiciary. However, the human rights 
action plan does not address any of the key shortcomings related to the independence of the 
judiciary. Despite their acquittal, none of the judges or prosecutors dismissed following the 
coup attempt were reinstated. The lack of objective, merit-based, uniform and pre-established 
criteria for recruiting and promoting judges and prosecutors remains a source of concern. No 
changes were made to the institution of criminal law judges of peace and concerns remain 
regarding their jurisdiction and practice. 
The recommendations of last year were not addressed. In the coming year, Turkey should in 
particular:  
 create a political and legal environment that allows the judiciary to perform its duties 
independently and impartially, respecting European standards; strengthen judicial 
responsibilities, with the executive and legislature fully respecting the separation of 
powers; and ensure that lower courts respect judgments by the Constitutional Court, 
whose decisions should follow ECtHR jurisprudence; 
 amend the structure and process of selecting the members of the Council of Judges and 


===== PAGE 24 =====
 
22 
 
Prosecutors so that the role and influence of the executive is limited, and introduce 
safeguards against any interference by the Council of Judges and Prosecutors or high level 
officials in judicial proceedings; 
 provide effective guarantees against transfers of judges without their consent;  
 in accordance with the guaranteed judicial independence under the Constitution, limit any 
suspension of judges from office to cases where there are well-founded suspicions of 
serious misbehaviour and take measures to remedy the damage caused by the dismissals 
that took place in breach of procedural rights; 
 revise the system of disciplinary proceedings so that it is based on objective criteria 
without undue influence from the executive; 
 in relation to the administrative and judicial measure taken against individuals, ensure that 
any allegation of wrongdoing or crime is subject to due process, based on concrete 
evidence, in line with fully transparent procedures under the authority of an independent 
judiciary; 
 ensure that all judicial proceedings respect fundamental rights, including procedural 
rights, in particular the presumption of innocence, individual criminal responsibility, legal 
certainty, the right to defence, the right to a fair trial, equality of arms and the right to an 
effective appeal.  
Strategic documents 
The implementation of the Judicial Reform Strategy for 2019-2023 continued. The Judicial 
Reform Strategy Action Plan was announced in October 2020. According to the authorities, 
the rate of implementation of the Strategy is around 50 %. However, there is no evidence-
based assessment of the results of its implementation.  
A new human rights action plan announced in March 2021 foresees some notable 
improvements, including limited activities to improve the independence of the judiciary. 
However, it does not effectively address the key shortcomings to tackle the systemic lack of 
the independence of the judiciary. Most importantly, the human rights action plan does not 
address the Venice Commission’s opinion on the constitutional amendment of April 2017, 
referring to the principle of separation of powers and the revision of the structure of the 
Council of Judges and Prosecutors. 
Management bodies 
Concerns remain around the structure of the Council of Judges and Prosecutors, the lack of 
independence from the executive and the appointment process of its members. In accordance 
with the Constitution, four members out of 13 are appointed by the President and seven 
members are appointed by Parliament by qualified majority. None is elected by their peers. In 
May 2021, the President appointed four new members and the Parliament appointed seven 
new members. The remaining two seats are attributed ex officio to the Minister of Justice and 
the Deputy Minister, who are also appointed by the President. The budget allocated to the 
Council of Judges and Prosecutors is 93 163 000 TRY (9 150 405 EUR) for 2020 and 
103 209 000 TRY (10 148 850 EUR) for 2021.  
Due to its lack of independence, the Council of Judges and Prosecutors remains suspended, 
since December 2016, from participating in the European Network of Councils for the 
Judiciary.  
Independence and impartiality 


===== PAGE 25 =====
 
23 
 
Although judicial independence is set out in the Constitution and the relevant legislation, 
there were further concerns regarding the independence and impartiality of the judiciary. In 
June 2021, the Constitutional Court accepted the indictment to close the second largest 
opposition party HDP.  
The shortcomings identified in the December 2016 opinion of the Venice Commission, 
related to the minimal standards for dismissals of judges as well as legal safeguards regarding 
the transfer of judges and prosecutors are yet to be addressed. Appeals against such transfers 
are possible but usually unsuccessful. Throughout 2020, the transfers of judges and 
prosecutors without their consent and without any justification apart from requirements of the 
service continued. In May 2021, the Council of Judges and Prosecutors transferred 3 070 
judges and prosecutors, just before the end of the Council’s mandate. Overall, 3 968 judges 
and public prosecutors were dismissed for alleged links to the Gülen movement since the 
attempted coup.  
The human rights action plan foresees a few activities to improve the independence of the 
judiciary, including the prevention of frequent transfer of judges, geographical guarantees for 
judges and prosecutors, a review of the disciplinary and promotion system of judges and 
prosecutors and an improved inspection system based on objective criteria. Most of these 
activities were already included in the Judicial Reform Strategy.  
Representatives of the executive and the legislature continued to publicly criticise and openly 
reject the ECtHR case law and the Constitutional Court. The leader of the MHP, part of the 
ruling coalition, pleaded for the abolition of the Constitutional Court. The Council of Judges 
and Prosecutors took no action against the members of courts who refrained from abiding by 
Constitutional Court judgments. Judicial independence was further undermined by public 
comments of representatives from the executive and legislature, including from the President 
over ongoing judicial cases. 
Justice professionals frequently resorted to pre-trial detention, while European standards 
consider it a last resort measure and for the shortest amount of time. The ECtHR concluded 
in several cases, including in the judgement of Selahattin Demirtaş, that the judicial 
authorities’ decision to extend the detention was based on grounds that were not sufficient to 
justify such decision and its duration.   
The recommendations of the Venice Commission’s opinion on the criminal peace judgeships 
have not been implemented. Under the current system, criminal law judges of peace have far-
reaching powers while objections to their decisions are not reviewed by a higher judicial 
body but by another criminal judge of peace.  
Lawyers, especially those providing legal assistance to Human Rights Defenders and civil 
and political activists, faced considerable obstacles in performing their work, including 
pressure and external interferences. Such interferences entail the refusal of admissions to the 
profession of lawyer for those who were dismissed by a state of emergency decree. The 
elections of most of the Bar Associations were prevented from taking place due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Consequently, the elections of the Union of Turkish Bar Associations 
were not held.  
Accountability  
Mechanisms to detect breaches of the integrity rules and enforce disciplinary penalties need 
to be made effective and free from political interference. However, they are undermined by 
the lack of independence of the Council of Judges and Prosecutors. Some members of the 
judiciary were subjected to sanctions for the legitimate exercise of their professional duties. 
The examination lodged in February 2020, by the Council of Judges and Prosecutors into the 


===== PAGE 26 =====
 
24 
 
three judges who acquitted the defendants in the Gezi Park trial due to a lack of evidence is 
still pending.  
The obligation of judges and prosecutors to declare their assets every five years is still 
applicable. It remains important to have a credible and functioning verification system and to 
ensure that due follow-up is given to late or wrong declarations of assets. No information is 
available as to sanctions imposed in case of breach of this procedure. 
Professionalism and competence 
Recruitments of judges and prosecutors continued to be carried out through a non-transparent 
selection process. The Ministry of Justice supervises the selection boards for new judges and 
prosecutors, and manages their yearly appraisal. The Council of Judges and Prosecutors itself 
plays no role in the selection boards, even though it takes the final decision on recruitment. 
There was no progress concerning the establishment of objective, merit-based, uniform and 
pre-established criteria for recruiting and promoting judges and prosecutors. The legal exam 
introduced in October 2019 for prospective judges, lawyers or public notaries to be conducted 
by the Higher Education Council has yet to take place. 
Quality of justice 
The pre-service training of candidate judges and prosecutors as well as in-service trainings 
continued to be delivered by the Justice Academy of Turkey. While the Academy has 
scientific, administrative and financial autonomy by law, concerns remain related to its 
independence, as it has no general assembly or board of directors and the management is left 
to its president, who is appointed by the President of the Republic. The lack of independence 
of the Academy affects its capacity to provide training programmes that meet the 
requirements of openness, competence and impartiality. The European Judicial Training 
Network (EJTN) decided at its 2021 General Assembly to maintain the suspension of the 
observer status of the Judicial Academy of Turkey decided in 2017. 
The human rights action plan envisages modifications of the seating order to ensure that 
defendants enjoy a more effective access to the legal assistance of a lawyer during the 
hearing. The objectives announced in the human rights action plan should also improve the 
quality of judicial decisions in terms of legal reasoning and factual evidence. Particularly in 
terrorism-related cases, there is a need to eliminate the concerns that evidence extracted 
coercively may be used to convict people. Evidence presented by the defence needs to be 
duly reflected in the court’s assessment. The system of confidentiality of decisions should be 
revised, as it is still used in many cases to limit access to justice and the right of defence.  
Frequent transfers of judges and prosecutors continued to negatively affect the quality of 
justice along with posting of newly recruited judges and prosecutors with less experience to 
the criminal courts.  
Efficiency 
While the Judicial Reform Strategy aimed to increase the quality and quantity of human 
resources, this goal was not achieved yet and did not lead to a reduction of the current backlog 
of cases. The budget for the judiciary was almost TRY 20 billion in 2020 (around EUR 2.02 
billion), representing 0.32 % of GDP and EUR 25 per inhabitant and TRY 24 billion for 2021 
(around EUR 2.42 billion).  
Large parts of the judiciary continued to be under severe pressure to handle cases in a timely 
manner, as the effects of the large-scale dismissals were still observed. Regarding the 
backlog of cases in the high courts, in June 2021 there were 43 372 pending cases for the 
Constitutional Court, compared to 36 265 in June 2020, and 133 428 for the Council of State 


===== PAGE 27 =====
 
25 
 
as of 31 March 2021. In 2020, the regional court of appeals received a total of 724 558 cases 
and dealt with 799 974 cases. It settled 780 193 cases. The Code of Procedures in general is 
free of formalism and does provide adequate tools in cases of urgency. Nevertheless, abusive 
delays are not sanctioned. Individual applications to the Constitutional Court continued to 
increase. Since the individual applications started in September 2012, it received a total of 
295 038 individual applications as of 31 December 2020 and has concluded 257 108 of them. 
The Court has found violation of at least one of rights in 14 027 applications. The number of 
pending applications is 37 930. In 2020, 40 402 applications were lodged and 45 414 were 
concluded.  
As of April 2021, there were 19.7 judges and 8.6 prosecutors per 100 000 inhabitants (against 
the European average of 21 judges/12 prosecutors per 100 000 inhabitants). There were 
21 979 judges and prosecutors in total, 1 379 of whom were recruited in 2020.  
Fight against corruption 
Turkey is at an early stage in the fight against corruption and there was no progress during 
the reporting period. The country has not established anti-corruption bodies in line with the 
United Nations Convention against Corruption, to which Turkey is party. The flaws of the 
legal framework and institutional architecture allowed undue political influence in the 
investigation and prosecution phases of corruption cases. The accountability and transparency 
of public institutions need to be improved. The absence of an anti-corruption strategy and 
action plan indicated a lack of will to fight decisively corruption. Most of the Council of 
Europe’s Group of States against Corruption (GRECO) outstanding recommendations have 
not been implemented. Overall, corruption is widespread and remains an issue of concern.  
In this regard, the Commission’s recommendations of the last years are maintained. In the 
coming year, Turkey should in particular:  
 effectively implement its international obligations in relation to the fight against 
corruption, including adhering to the United Nations Convention against Corruption and 
the Council of Europe Conventions; 
 ensure effective follow-up to the recommendations issued by the GRECO, including by 
adopting the necessary legislation; 
 establish a track record of successful prosecution of, and convictions for high-level 
corruption; 
 adopt an anti-corruption strategy, reflecting a clear political will and vision to effectively 
address corruption, underpinned by a credible and realistic action plan. 
Track record 
The track record of investigation, prosecution and conviction in corruption cases remained 
poor, particularly in relation to high profile corruption cases implicating politicians and public 
officials. The President dismissed the Minister of Trade in April 2021, amidst allegations of 
a corruption scandal implicating her family members and advisors in public tenders. Despite 
suspicions raised by public revelations, no judicial investigation was launched. The main 
opposition party, CHP, filed a motion requesting a parliamentary inquiry commission to 
investigate the allegations. Corruption-related sentences need to be more dissuasive. The 
corruption perception remains high and was further exacerbated by public accusations from 
a mafia leader targeting several government members and public figures for their alleged 
involvement in corruption and other crime cases.  
Institutional framework 


===== PAGE 28 =====
 
26 
 
Prevention measures 
Turkey has still not established any permanent, functionally independent anti-corruption 
body. Inspection units within the administration remained ineffective. The coordination 
between various preventive bodies such as the audit and inspection units and the prosecution 
offices remained inadequate. The legal framework of anti-corruption also remained weak in 
the private sector. There were no awareness-raising campaigns on anti-corruption.  
 
Law enforcement 
There were no prosecution services nor courts specialised in anti-corruption cases. The 
executive exerted undue political influence over judicial police. Financial investigations were 
not systematically carried out in corruption and organised crime cases. Financial control of 
political parties remained ineffective. 
Legal framework 
Turkey is party to all international anti-corruption conventions. However, Turkey fails to fully 
align with the provisions of these conventions. Previous anti-corruption strategies and action 
plans have not been effectively followed up. The legislative reforms foreseen in previous anti-
corruption strategies have not been undertaken. The legislation on whistle-blower protection 
and public procurement is not aligned with the EU acquis. 
No tangible progress was made to implement GRECO’s recommendations. In its Second 
Interim Compliance Report under the Fourth Evaluation Round, published in March 2021, 
GRECO concluded that no changes intervened in Turkey since the adoption of the Interim 
Report in March 2019: out of 22 recommendations in the area of “Corruption prevention in 
respect of members of Parliament, judges and prosecutors”, only three remain satisfactorily 
implemented. Nine recommendations are still only partially implemented and ten 
recommendations remain not implemented. GRECO further underlined the absence of a law 
on ethical conduct for members of Parliament and the lack of measures to ensure integrity of 
Members of Parliament.  
Under the Third Evaluation Round, officially closed in October 2020 after 10 years, Turkey 
implemented satisfactorily only seven of the 17 recommendations. More specifically, as 
regards the transparency of political financing which was assessed under that Round, only one 
GRECO recommendation out of nine has been fully implemented over the last 10 years.   
Shortcomings remain unaddressed in the Criminal Code, which do not meet the standards put 
in place by the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption. The significant number of 
exemptions included in the Law on Public Procurement created a grey area for corruption. 
The legal privileges and shelters of public officials, such as the requirement for prior 
authorisation from their hierarchy before starting an investigation of alleged wrongdoing, 
continued to provide legal protection for public officials in anti-corruption criminal and 
administrative investigations. The legal framework on preventing, prosecuting and issuing 
penalties for conflicts of interest as well as on declaring, verifying and disclosing assets 
remained inadequate and unaddressed. Turkey took no steps to align its legislation governing 
lobbying. 
Strategic framework 
The 2010-2014 as well as 2016-2019 anti-corruption strategies and their respective action 
plans failed to meet most of their stated objectives. Outstanding measures have not yet been 
implemented. Turkey again failed to take measures that will strengthen its overall capacity to 


===== PAGE 29 =====
 
27 
 
coordinate, implement and monitor all anti-corruption actions among the relevant preventive 
institutions and law enforcement agencies.  
Fundamental rights  
The deterioration of human rights continued and no progress was made on last year’s 
recommendations. Many of the measures introduced during the state of emergency remain in 
force and continue to have a profound and devastating impact on people in Turkey. The legal 
framework includes general guarantees of respect for human and fundamental rights but the 
legislation and practice still need to be brought into line with the European Convention on 
Human Rights (ECHR) and the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) case-law.  
The Council of Europe’s Parliamentary Assembly continued its monitoring of Turkey’s 
respect for human rights, democracy and the rule of law. Broad scale restrictions imposed on 
the activities of journalists, writers, lawyers, academics, human rights defenders and critical 
voices continued to have a negative effect on the exercise of their freedoms and lead to self-
censorship. Turkey’s continued refusal to implement ECtHR rulings, notably in the cases of 
Selahattin Demirtaş and Osman Kavala, further increased concerns regarding the judiciary’s 
adherence to the international and European standards.  
Turkey’s withdrawal from the Istanbul Convention also questioned its commitment to such 
standards. The new human rights action plan, which promised reforms in a number of areas, 
does not address critical issues.  
In addition to addressing the shortcomings set out in this section, which have still not been 
addressed, in the coming year Turkey should in particular: 
 align criminal and anti-terror legislation and their implementation with European 
standards, ECHR and ECtHR case-law and Venice Commission recommendations; 
 ensure that any allegation of offence is subject to due process, based on concrete evidence 
and fully transparent procedures under the authority of an independent and impartial 
judiciary, and fully respecting the right to a fair trial and relevant procedural rights, in 
particular the presumption of innocence, individual criminal responsibility, legal certainty, 
the right to defence, equality of arms and the right to an effective appeal; 
 ensure the effectiveness of the Inquiry Commission on the State of Emergency Measures 
as a domestic remedy and that all public-sector employees arbitrarily dismissed during the 
state of emergency continue to be re-instated, and appropriately compensated for any 
harm, including loss of earnings; 
 effectively tackle all forms of violence against women, including domestic violence, 
psychological and physical abuse, sexual harassment, rape, crimes committed in the name 
of “honour”, stalking, and forced marriage; implement measures to prevent violence 
against women, to protect the victims and to prosecute the perpetrators. 
Turkey is a party to most international human rights instruments, although the respect for 
fundamental rights in practice continued to be undermined. The withdrawal from the Council 
of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic 
violence (“Istanbul Convention”) was widely considered to be an important setback. It also 
led to renewed legal debates regarding Turkey’s possibility to withdraw from other 
international conventions. In June 2021, the Constitutional Court ruled that the President has 
the authority to withdraw Turkey from international conventions by Presidential decree and 
rejected the request for the suspension of the enforcement of the withdrawal from the Istanbul 
Convention made by a number of political parties and CSOs. Turkey has not yet signed the 


===== PAGE 30 =====
 
28 
 
International Convention for the Protection of all Persons from Enforced Disappearance and 
the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. 
The full monitoring procedure by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe 
continued. 
In 2020, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) found violations of the ECHR in 
97 cases (out of 104) relating mainly to freedom of expression, the right to liberty and 
security, protection of property, the right to fair trial, freedom of assembly and association, 
respect for private and family life and right to life. During the reporting period, 10 790 new 
applications were registered by the ECtHR. In January 2021, the total number of Turkish 
applications pending before the Court was 13 491. There are currently 225 cases against 
Turkey in the enhanced monitoring procedure.  
In the case of Selahattin Demirtaş v. Turkey (No. 2), in December 2020, the Grand Chamber 
of the ECtHR ruled that by initially detaining Mr Demirtaş and then prolonging his detention 
for over four years, the Turkish Government had pursued an ulterior motive of preventing him 
from carrying out his political activities, depriving voters of their elected representative, and 
‘stifling pluralism and limiting freedom of political debate: the very core of the concept of 
a democratic society’. The ruling concluded that Turkey had violated Article 18 of the ECHR, 
while there were insufficient reasons for continued detention and ordered for his immediate 
release. The Court also stated that the continuation of Mr Demirtaş’ pre-trial detention would 
amount to prolongation of the violations of ECHR, as well as breach of Turkey’s obligation to 
abide by the Court’s judgment in accordance with Article 46(1) of ECHR. At the same time, 
the Grand Chamber found no violation of Article 5(4) ECHR concerning lack of speedy 
judicial review by the Turkish Constitutional Court.  
In the case of Kavala v. Turkey, in March 2021 the Committee of Ministers of the Council of 
Europe recalled the ECtHR’s findings that the applicant’s arrest and pre-trial detention took 
place in the absence of evidence to support a reasonable suspicion he had committed an 
offence (violation of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention) and pursued an ulterior purpose, namely 
to silence him and dissuade other human rights defenders (violation of Article 18 taken in 
conjunction with Article 5 § 1); and that the one year and nearly five months taken by the 
Constitutional Court to review his complaint was insufficiently “speedy”, given that his 
personal liberty was at stake (violation of Article 5 § 4). The Council of Ministers reiterated 
their call for the applicant’s immediate release. Finally, the Council of Ministers decided to 
examine the applicant’s situation at each regular and human rights meeting of the Committee 
until such time that he is released. 
In March 2021, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe reviewed Cyprus v. 
Turkey as well as Varnava and others. The Committee underlined that it remained urgent for 
the Turkish authorities to maintain their proactive approach to providing the Committee on 
Missing Persons (CMP) with all necessary assistance. The Committee urged the Turkish 
authorities to provide the CMP proprio motu with all information from all the relevant 
Turkish archives, including military archives, relating to burial sites. The Committee noted 
with interest the information provided by the Turkish authorities on the progress of 
investigations conducted by the “Missing Persons Unit” in the northern part of Cyprus. 
Finally, the Committee insisted again firmly on the unconditional obligation of Turkey to pay 
without further delay the just satisfaction awarded by the European Court in Cyprus v. Turkey 
and Varnava v. Turkey. 
Regarding the implementation of the Demopoulos v. Turkey decision of 5 March 2010, 6 856 
applications from Greek Cypriot owners have to date been lodged with the Immovable 
Property Commission (IPC). As of June 2021, 1 227 applications had been concluded through 


===== PAGE 31 =====
 
29 
 
amicable settlements and 34 through formal hearings. Altogether, the IPC has so far paid out 
the equivalent of approximately EUR 368 million in compensation. 
On the promotion and enforcement of human rights, a new human rights action plan was 
adopted and published in March 2021. The defined objectives of the human rights action plan 
include: a stronger system for the protection of human rights, strengthening the independence 
of the judiciary and the right to a fair trial, legal predictability and transparency, protection 
and enhancement of freedom of expression, association and religion, strengthening of 
individual liberty and security and safeguarding the physical and moral integrity and the 
private life of individuals. It also foresees to improve protection of property rights, protection 
of vulnerable groups, to strengthen social welfare, and provide a high-level administrative and 
social awareness on human rights. The human rights action plan foresees 393 activities to be 
implemented within two years. Several foreseen activities are repetitions of actions included 
in earlier strategy documents.  
Although numerous consultations and workshops were held in the preparation of the human 
rights action plan, including with some rights-based civil society organisations, no advance 
draft of the human rights action plan was shared with relevant stakeholders. This prevented 
meaningful input on policy proposals. The Council of Europe and the European Commission 
were not consulted on the basis of an elaborated draft, only on an initial outline. The human 
rights action plan does not include specific objectives, activities, indicators, references and 
timelines. No evidence-based assessment of the implementation of the human rights action 
plan on the Prevention of ECHR violations (2014-2019), the previous strategy document in 
this area, was used to prepare the new action plan.   
The human rights action plan does not address critical issues underpinning the deteriorating 
and worrying human rights situation in Turkey. In particular, the action plan does not address 
the primary criticism incorporated in the opinion of the Venice Commission on the 
constitutional amendment of April 2017, including on the independence of the judiciary. No 
concrete plans are presented for amending the Turkish Penal Code, the Anti-Terror Law, the 
Internet Law, the Code on Criminal Procedures, and the Law on Enforcement of Sentences. 
The action plan does not refer to gender equality.  
The Human Rights and Equality Institution of Turkey (HREI) and the Ombudsman are the 
main human rights institutions. The Ombudsman Institution only processes complaints 
against the actions of the public administration and has no ex-officio powers while the HREI 
only accepts cases outside the remit of the Ombudsman. Neither of these institutions is 
operationally, structurally or financially independent, and their members are not appointed in 
compliance with the Paris Principles. The HREI has not applied for an accreditation to the 
Global Alliance for National Human Rights Institutions and does not comply with the 
European Commission’s Recommendation on Standards for Equality Bodies.  
The effectiveness of both institutions in dealing with applications is very limited. In 2020, 
HREI received 1 363 applications, visited 13 institutions including prisons and 10 visits were 
carried out by June 2021; 10 visit reports are pending. Certain HREI members demonstrated a 
negative attitude towards basic human rights, including gender equality, women's rights, 
LGBTIQ rights, and expressed support for the withdrawal from the Istanbul Convention, all 
of which contradict the stated objectives of the institution.  
A total of 2 591 applications were filed to the Parliament’s Human Rights Inquiry Committee 
in 2020.  
Human rights defenders faced increasing pressure through intimidation, judicial 
prosecutions, violent attacks, threats, surveillance, prolonged arbitrary detention and ill-


===== PAGE 32 =====
 
30 
 
treatment. This continued to have a chilling effect on the independent civil society. Smear 
campaigns by some media outlets close to the government and an aggressive rhetoric by high 
government officials towards human rights defenders continued to create a climate of fear and 
narrowed the space for critical views. Furthermore, lawyers providing legal assistance to 
human rights defenders and civil and political activists continued to face considerable 
obstacles in performing their work and were themselves at risk of arrest, detention and 
prosecution.  
In January 2021, in the Gezi case of human rights defenders and civil society representatives, 
the Court of Appeals overturned the February 2020 ruling that had acquitted the nine 
defendants and imposed a travel ban on them.  
The Turkish authorities did not follow up on the Council of Europe Committee of Ministers’ 
regular interim resolutions strongly urging Osman Kavala’s immediate release. In December 
2020, the Constitutional Court also published its reasoned judgement where it rejected the 
second individual application of Osman Kavala, concluding that the applicant's right to 
personal liberty and security had not been violated. On 1 September 2021, an Istanbul Court 
ruled to prolong the detention of Mr Kavala.  
The trials continued against the group of 11 human rights defenders in the Büyükada Island 
case for alleged links to a terrorist organisation. A regional court upheld the convictions of 
four of them, including the former director of Amnesty International Turkey on terrorist 
charges. The case is pending before the Court of Cassation where its Chief Prosecutor has 
demanded to acquit three defendants but to uphold the prison sentence for the former 
Amnesty International director.  
In February 2021, the Minister of Interior harshly criticised the Human Rights Association 
following its press statement on the deaths of 13 Turkish citizens in northern Iraq's Gara 
region. Subsequently, the Human Rights Association chairperson was briefly detained by the 
police.  
Many women human rights defenders and activists were detained and faced pecuniary fines 
while protesting against the withdrawal from the Istanbul Convention.  
The court case regarding the killing of Lawyer Tahir Elçi in 2015, then chairperson of the 
Diyarbakır Bar Association, started in Diyarbakır in October 2020.  
Concerning the right to life, no steps were taken to ensure credible and effective 
investigations into reported killings by the security authorities, which remains a serious 
concern. According to independent data, in 2020 the right to life of at least 3,291 people was 
violated. In March 2021, the Constitutional Court concluded that the right to life of a Nigerian 
citizen killed by the police during his detention in 2007 was violated, and sentenced the 
responsible police officer to 16 years of imprisonment. Two villagers in Van province who 
were taken away by a military helicopter and allegedly tortured after being detained in 
November 2020 applied to the Constitutional Court. One of the villagers subsequently died of 
his injuries. There is still no credible investigation carried out into this incident. As a positive 
development, the Diyarbakır Governorate gave permission in April to investigate a police 
officer in the case of a 12-year-old child killed in 2015.  
Overall, impunity is a major source of concern. The legislation adopted in June 2016 granting 
judicial privileges to the security forces and increasing the risk of impunity is still in force. 
The authorities need to take urgent measures to align this legislation with the ECtHR case-law 
and standards. No measures were taken to effectively investigate and sanction the reported 
killings by the security authorities in the southeast, especially in relation to the events in 2015. 
In the court case on the killing of a university student during the Newroz celebrations in 


===== PAGE 33 =====
 
31 
 
Diyarbakır in 2017, the perpetrator police officer was acquitted in November 2020 of the 
charge of “killing with intent”. In many cases, authorities denied permission to prosecute 
public servants. Alleged cases of abductions and enforced disappearances by security or 
intelligence services in several provinces continue to be reported since the attempted coup 
with no adequate investigations carried out. The cases of at least two dozen persons allegedly 
abducted by state agents for many months have not yet been effectively investigated by the 
Turkish authorities. In April 2021, the Ministry of Interior issued a circular preventing 
citizens from recording videos of police officers during demonstrations, raising further 
concerns over the weakening of law enforcement officers’ accountability and the prevention 
of evidence collection. 
Credible and grave allegations of torture and ill-treatment continued to be reported. 
According to available reports, torture and ill-treatment still occur in detention centres, 
prisons and in informal places of detention as well as on the streets, mostly during 
demonstrations and meetings. There are reported allegations of torture and ill-treatment in 
prisons. Ill-treatment and excessive use of force took place in particular during the 
demonstrations in the Boğaziçi University protests and the Pride marches. There was an 
increase in the number of claims of strip searches while entering the prison facilities or while 
being detained. Although the legislation allows such practice in certain circumstances, rights 
activists and victims argue that strip searches are often implemented not in accordance with 
procedures. The publication of the pending 2016 report of the Council of Europe’s Committee 
for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) was not authorised by the authorities. The last CPT visit 
to Turkey took place in January 2021. The Human Rights and Equality Institution of Turkey 
(HREI), which should act as the national preventive mechanism, does not meet the key 
requirements under the Optional Protocol to the UN Convention against Torture and other 
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (UNCAT) and is not yet effectively 
processing cases referred to it. Effective prison monitoring boards need to be set up.  
The legislation, which allows for a maximum police custody period of up to 12 days, is in 
contravention of ECtHR case law (maximum of four days) and needs to be revised. 
Complaints, reports and any indications of torture or ill-treatment need to be investigated 
swiftly, effectively and impartially; perpetrators must be prosecuted and convicted in line with 
Turkey’s international obligations, in particular with the ECHR and the UNCAT. 
Overcrowding and deteriorating prison conditions continue to be a source of deep concern. 
Turkey was the Council of Europe Member State with the highest overcrowding rate (127 
inmates per 100 available places). The new human rights action plan includes an overall 
commitment to improve living conditions in prisons and address the well-being of juveniles.  
Allegations continued of human rights violations in prisons, including arbitrary restrictions on 
the rights of detainees, denial of access to medical care and the use of torture, mistreatment, 
prevention of open visits, and solitary confinement.  
Hunger strikes in some prisons demanded an end to PKK leader Öcalan’s isolation and an end 
to violations of detainees’ rights in prisons. Investigations of allegations of abuse and 
inhuman or degrading conditions continued to be limited, and the results of such 
investigations were not generally documented in a publicly accessible manner. Prison 
monitoring boards remained largely ineffective and the HREI, which should act as the 
national preventive mechanism is not independent. The government did not allow NGOs to 
monitor prisons. The Human Rights Inquiry Committee has received 3 363 applications on 
human rights violations from detainees and prisoners since June 2018 but has found no 
violations in any of the cases.  


===== PAGE 34 =====
 
32 
 
On the protection of personal data, no steps were taken to align the 2016 data protection law 
with the EU acquis. This constitutes an obstacle to the possible cooperation with Eurojust,  
Europol and, more generally, in a number of policy areas. Turkey still needs to address inter 
alia concerns on the exceptions for law enforcement and the independence of the Personal 
Data Protection Authority. Turkey still has not yet signed the 2018 Protocol amending the 
Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal 
Data (Council of Europe, CETS No 223).  
On freedom of thought, conscience and religion, freedom of worship continued to be 
generally respected. The lack of legal personality of non-Muslim communities remains a 
serious issue and the Venice Commission recommendations on the legal status of non-Muslim 
religious communities and the right of the Orthodox Patriarchate of Istanbul to use the title 
“Ecumenical” have yet to be implemented. The long lasting problem of election procedures of 
minority foundations was not addressed. Several ECtHR judgments regarding conscientious 
objection are yet to be implemented. School textbooks need to be revised in order to remove 
all discriminatory elements against all religions and faith groups.  
Following the decision to turn Hagia Sophia into a mosque in July 2020, two UNESCO 
advisory missions took place in October 2020 and January/ February 2021, to review the 
impacts of change of status of Hagia Sophia and Chora (another museum among the World 
Heritage Sites in Turkey that was converted into a mosque in August 2020), on the 
Outstanding Universal Value of the properties. No steps were taken to open the Halki 
(Heybeliada) Greek Orthodox Seminary, which remains closed since 1971. 
Hate speech and hate crimes against Christians and Jews continued to be reported (see below - 
Minorities). Alevis faced hate crimes, and investigations in this regard remained ineffective. 
A comprehensive legal framework in line with European standards needs to be put in place, 
and appropriate attention must be paid to implementing the ECtHR judgments on compulsory 
religion and ethics classes and Alevi worship places. Protestants faced problems with 
recognition of their places of worship. Several foreign protestant clergy members were 
deported or denied entry and refused visa permits.  
The increased work and influence of the Religious Affairs Presidency (Diyanet) continued in 
all spheres of public life. Its President publically targeted atheists in his several speeches.  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Freedom of expression  
Turkey is at an early stage in this area and the serious backsliding continued over the 
reporting period. Legislation and its implementation, especially related to national security 
and anti-terrorism provisions, continued to contravene the European Convention on Human 
Rights and other international standards and to diverge from the case-law of the ECtHR. The 
dissemination of opposition voices and freedom of expression were negatively affected by the 
increasing pressure and restrictive measures. Criminal cases and convictions of journalists, 
human rights defenders, lawyers, writers, opposition politicians, students and social media 
users continued.  
The Directorate of Communication linked to the Presidency, in charge of issuing press 
accreditation, continued to face strong criticism as a considerable number of press cards 
cancelled in 2020 were not renewed. The blocking and erasing of online content without 
a court order on an inappropriately wide range of grounds, based on the Internet Law and the 
general legal framework, continued.  


===== PAGE 35 =====
 
33 
 
The recommendations of the last four annual reports of the Commission were not addressed. 
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:  
 release journalists, human rights defenders, lawyers, writers and academics being held in 
pre-trial detention; 
 ensure a safe, plural and enabling environment for the media to carry out their work 
independently and without fear of reprisals and dismissals. This includes ending the 
practice, exercised by both state and non-state agents, of intimidating, interfering with and 
putting pressure on the media;  
 revise the existing legislation, in particular the Anti-Terror Law, the Criminal Code, the 
Data Protection Law and the Internet Law, to comply with European standards and ensure 
that it is implemented in a manner which does not curtail freedom of expression;  
 ensure that criminal law provisions on defamation and on other similar offences are not 
used as a means of putting pressure on critical voices.  
Intimidation of journalists  
Arrests, detentions, prosecutions, convictions and dismissals of media staff leading to 
censorship and self-censorship among media professionals further increased, including for 
their reporting activities on COVID - 19. Overall, an estimated 60 journalists were in prison. 
In 2020, at least 48 journalists were taken into custody, 23 journalists were sentenced to 
a total of 103 years in prison. As of January 2021, at least 353 journalists have been 
prosecuted in the last two and a half years. In 2020, trials were launched against at least 53 
journalists. Threats and physical attacks on journalists and media organisations due to their 
work continued during the reporting period. Civil society organisations reported that in the 
first weeks of 2021, five opposition journalists from around Turkey were physically assaulted. 
In total, at least 18 journalists were attacked in 2020; attacks continued in 2021.  
Judicial cases against critical newspapers continued. In November 2020, a Court of Appeals 
reversed the ruling of acquittal of 2019 of three defendants standing trial for having 
participated in the “Editors-in-Chief on Watch” campaign in solidarity with the Özgür 
Gündem newspaper closed in 2016. There was no reparation for damages incurred by private 
media companies and their staff by the takeover by the state during and after the state of 
emergency. 
Legislative environment  
The current legislation regarding anti-terrorism, the internet, intelligence services and the 
Criminal Code, all impede freedom of expression and run counter to European standards. 
Selective and arbitrary application of the legislation continued to raise concerns as it 
infringes the basic principles of the rule of law and right to a fair trial. 
Implementation/institutions  
The criminal legislation continued to allow journalists’ prosecution and imprisonment on 
extensive charges of terrorism (see - Judiciary), insulting public officials, and/or allegedly 
committing crimes against the state and the government. Exercise of constitutional rights were 
cited as crimes and used as grounds for indictments, which often failed to establish direct and 
credible links with the alleged offence. For example participating in press statements, or trade 
union activities are cited as support to terror organisations. Critical journalists were 
intimidated with judicial investigations and court decisions. The space for civil society 
organisations was further limited by the criminal convictions and fines imposed on human 
rights defenders for participating in demonstrations, issuing press statements and carrying out 


===== PAGE 36 =====
 
34 
 
legitimate activities. The Press Advertisement Agency (BiK) continued to impose bans on 
public advertising for media that criticised the government.  
The accreditation of journalists and the system of issuing press cards needs to be reformed. 
The removal of press cards on security grounds had a deterrent effect on the work of foreign 
correspondents in Turkey. According to the authorities, 1 238 press cards had been cancelled 
between December 2018 and December 2020.  
The journalist and writer Ahmet Altan, who had been imprisoned for the last four years under 
controversial charges, was eventually released by the Court of Cassation in April 2021. 
Article 299 of the Turkish Penal Code on insulting the President, which foresees a maximum 
sentence of four years in prison, was used extensively to prosecute critical voices. 
Investigations, arrests and prosecutions of journalists, writers, opposition politicians, students, 
youth and social media users (including children), for insulting the President, continued.  
As a matter of example, in March 2021 the Turkish Parliament revoked the parliamentarian 
status of opposition HDP deputy Ömer Faruk Gergerlioğlu after the Court of Cassation upheld 
his prison sentence for “spreading terrorist propaganda” based on a retweet of a newspaper 
article that was still online at the date of reporting.  
In April 2021, an investigation was launched against officials of the opposition party CHP for 
allegedly insulting the President, after they accused the government of causing the Central 
Bank to run out of foreign exchange reserves and requested transparency on this issue.  
In April 2021, a judicial investigation was launched against 10 retired admirals, who signed 
a statement expressing their concerns over the government’s possible intention to withdraw 
from the 1936 Montreux Convention. In reaction, the President said that the retired admirals’ 
comments went beyond freedom of expression and aimed to inspire a military coup. The 10 
former admirals were detained for eight days before being released under judicial control.  
In several cases, the European Court of Human Rights ruled that the Turkish Government 
violated Article 10 of the ECHR, including in the cases against journalist and MP Ahmet Şık, 
Cumhuriyet daily and singer Atilla Taş who got a prison sentence in relation to the coup 
attempt in July 2016. 
According to independent data, the authorities detained at least 2 123 protesters in at least 320 
peaceful assemblies on suspicion of “inciting hatred” and “violating the law on 
demonstrations” and for “resisting police orders.” The President, the leader of the MHP party 
and the Minister of Interior used inflammatory and polarising rhetoric calling the students 
“terrorists” and stigmatising the LGBTIQ community. After the appointment of a new rector 
to the Boğaziçi University by a presidential decision in January 2021, students from Boğaziçi 
and other universities supported by the university’s academics started protests. Many students 
were charged with inciting hatred and insulting religious values. In July 2021, by 
a presidential decision, the Boğaziçi Rector was taken off duty. 
The Constitutional Court issued several judgements in individual applications in which it 
concluded that the right to freedom of expression was violated. In spite of a Constitutional 
Court decision of July 2019, that established a violation regarding individuals known as 
‘Peace Academics’, and the consequent acquittals that followed, only very few academics 
were reinstated and received a negligible compensation. The State of Emergency Commission 
has still not examined a single ‘Peace Academics’ case since July 2017, when it started 
receiving applications. Few academics have applied to the Constitutional Court due to lack of 
decision by the State of Emergency Commission. 


===== PAGE 37 =====
 
35 
 
In April 2021, after an application of the main opposition Republican People's Party (CHP), 
the Constitutional Court repealed the article of a statutory decree that paved the way for 
closing newspapers, television channels and agencies and seizing their assets during the state 
of emergency, on the grounds that they pose a threat to national security. According to the 
Constitutional Court, a court ruling is necessary even for a temporary closure, thus, the direct 
closure of media outlets constitutes the severest interference in fundamental rights and 
freedoms. Nevertheless, the decision on this issue came after many seized assets and licences 
had been sold. 
There are no official statistics on banned websites, or the blockage of content based on 
decisions of criminal law judges of peace.  
Public Service Broadcasters  
The public service broadcaster Turkish Radio and Television Corporation (TRT) is affiliated 
with the Presidential Communication Authority, and the Radio and Television Supreme 
Council (RTÜK) with the Ministry of Culture and Tourism. The editorial policy of TRT 
closely reflects the government’s official lines. There was no improvement in the 
independence and neutrality of RTÜK. Members continue to be elected by Parliament without 
consultation of civil society or professional media organisations.  
RTÜK continued to suspend and fine independent television and radio channels for their 
broadcasting content on the vague grounds that it is ‘contrary to the national and moral values 
of society, general morality and the principle of family protection’. It issued an excessive 
amount of monetary penalties on TV outlets critical of the government while mostly ignoring 
complaints against pro-government ones according to a report issued by a RTÜK member. 
RTÜK opened an investigation against a CHP deputy for "insulting the army" after he 
criticised the sale of a military factory to Qatar, and issued a pecuniary fine on Habertürk TV 
for airing his words. A new independent OLAY TV was closed down after 26 days of 
broadcasting due to pressures from the government.  
Economic factors  
The Broadcasting Law does not ensure fair competition, as it does not prevent 
monopolisation. The ownership of the Turkish media outlets lacks transparency and a few 
holding groups are close to the government, which undermines the independence of editorial 
policies. The economic pressure on independent media outlets was heightened because the 
state-sponsored advertising was not fairly distributed. The agency responsible for the 
distribution of the state advertising budget took no steps to increase its accountability and 
transparency, in particular it did not publish its annual reports. Independent and sustainable 
financing of the public service broadcaster is not ensured. 
Internet  
Amendments to the Internet Law, adopted in August 2020, now require social media 
companies with more than one million users in Turkey to establish an office in the country 
and locally store Turkish users’ data. Social media companies are also required to address 
court removal and/or blocking orders within 24 hours and individual users’ takedown and/or 
blocking requests within 48 hours. Social media companies face fines of TL 5 to 10 million if 
they fail to respond to takedown and blocking requests within the time specified and are 
obliged to pay compensation for damages incurred. As of April 2021, all companies, 
including Facebook, TikTok, Twitter and YouTube complied with the new legislation, raising 
concerns that the government will be able to easily require the removal of content deemed 
objectionable and companies will have little recourse to challenge such requests.  


===== PAGE 38 =====
 
36 
 
Professional organisations and working conditions  
The representation of journalists is still divided between the professional journalists’ 
associations and the pro-government union. Journalism in Turkey continued to be a precarious 
and risky profession, with low wages, high risk of judicial harassment and lack of job 
security. Working conditions continue to be instable, trade union rights are insufficient and 
labour legislation is not properly applied. Obtaining press cards and arbitrary accreditations 
remain major problems. Investigative journalism, politically sensitive issues continue to be 
subject to editorial pressure, self-censorship and judicial harassment (see also Chapter 10 - 
Information society and media).  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
There was serious backsliding in the area of freedom of assembly and association where 
legislation and its implementation are not in line with the Turkish Constitution, European 
standards or with international conventions that Turkey is party to. There was an increase in 
application of bans, disproportionate interventions and excessive use of force in peaceful 
demonstrations, investigations, administrative fines and prosecutions against demonstrators 
on charges of terrorism-related activities. The applicable ECtHR case-law on freedom of 
assembly needs to be implemented without delay and relevant national laws need to be 
revised accordingly. 
A new law adopted in December 2020 on preventing financing of proliferation of weapons of 
mass destruction risks to increase further the pressure over civil society organisations. This 
law was based on the recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). 
However, there are strong concerns expressed by Turkish civil society, the Council of 
Europe’s Venice Commission and Commissioner for Human Rights as well as UN Special 
Rapporteurs regarding several aspects of the legislation. The law notably vests the authority to 
the Ministry of Interior and Provincial Governors to dismiss NGO executives based on 
ongoing "terrorism-related" investigations or convictions, as well as suspends the activities of 
NGOs. The Ministry and Governors are also authorised to monitor the NGOs' fundraising 
activities and impose penalties for unpermitted campaigns. Furthermore, all associations and 
foundations will be obliged to inform the Ministry on donations they receive coming from 
abroad. The law was not prepared in a participatory manner and was adopted in record time. 
Prior to its adoption, 694 independent civil society organisations issued a statement against 
the draft law. Several pro-AKP associations and foundations also campaigned against it. After 
the adoption of the law, many rights-based NGOs faced audits by the Ministry, especially 
those receiving foreign funds. Any measures taken to counter terrorism must comply with 
Turkey’s other obligations under international law, including in the area of human rights.  
In January 2021, an amended regulation gave police and intelligence services access to 
military weaponry upon the Minister of Defence’s approval. Such weapons can be handed 
over in case of terrorism, societal incidents and acts of violence that seriously threaten 
national security, public order and public security.  
Protests for political and socio-economic rights were banned in several provinces on many 
occasions. Demonstrations of dismissed civil servants demanding to be reinstated and of 
workers demonstrating for their health rights were stopped. 37 persons were sentenced for 
participating in the environmental protests organised in 2011 against the thermal power plant 
Project in Gerze. The power plant project was cancelled for violating the Law on Forests in 
2015 but the protesters continued to be sentenced for their protests. 
Newroz was celebrated by millions of people in the south-east on 20 March 2021. However, 
events and demonstrations related to the Kurdish issue, protests against the appointment of 


===== PAGE 39 =====
 
37 
 
trustees or organised by opposition groups were prohibited on security grounds. Several 
provincial governors, especially in the east and south-east, continued to use extraordinary 
powers contained in a law introduced after the end of the state of emergency to restrict the 
right to peaceful assembly, including through the imposition of blanket bans. In 2020, blanket 
bans on assemblies were issued 253 times and bans on specific assemblies were imposed 115 
times.  
The Law on Meetings and Demonstrations allows the administration to adopt decisions on the 
basis of abstract, discretionary and arbitrary criteria regarding the prohibition of meetings and 
demonstrations. Prohibitions based on the justification of disruption of public order, ensuring 
peace and internal security as well as a number of additional abstract claims were routinely 
used. In the 15-day bans imposed regularly by the provincial governorates in many provinces, 
reference is made to the relevant articles of the law and no justification is cited. 
The appeals process of the case launched by the Human Rights Association to cancel the 
October 2018 regulation which obliges associations to disclose all their members to 
authorities, continued. Court cases against members and founders of the Rosa Women’s 
Association also continued. Rosa and other associations in the south-east were subject to 
police raids and operations. A court case was launched against 46 human rights defenders and 
relatives of victims of enforced disappearances who are part of the Saturday Mothers group in 
Istanbul.  
Turkey’s new Green Party filed a court case against the Interior Ministry for failing to 
complete registration procedures after submission of all necessary documents for six months. 
A petition on the establishment of the Humanity and Freedom Party is pending before the 
Ministry for the past three years. A closure case against the Anadolu Kultur is pending.  
Issues of labour and trade union rights are further covered in Chapter 19 - Social policy and 
employment. 
On property rights, the Inquiry Commission on the State of Emergency Measures is slow to 
issue decisions, lacks transparency and does not provide an effective domestic remedy for 
confiscations. In March 2021, the Directorate-General for Foundations (DGF) took over the 
ownership of the Taksim Gezi Park from the Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality (IBB). The 
IBB announced it would file a court case to contest this decision. 
In the south-east, restoration of cultural and religious heritage and urban housing construction 
continued, as well as court cases regarding the 2016 expropriations in Sur. Regarding the 
implementation of the Law on Foundations to minority communities, most of the appeals for 
the restitution of property were pending either before a local court or before the ECtHR. The 
case of the Mor Gabriel Monastery Syriac Orthodox Church Foundation’s forestry lands was 
pending before the ECtHR Grand Chamber. Other cases in relation to the ownership of the 
land of the Mor Gabriel Monastery were ongoing. Other non-Muslim community foundations 
have properties not returned yet. Specific concerns regarding Christians and Jews in Antakya 
who are not covered by the Foundations Law were not addressed. The Council of Europe’s 
recommendations on protecting property rights and education rights still need to be fully 
implemented. The Council of Europe Resolution 1625 (2008) regarding property rights on the 
islands of Gökçeada (Imbros) and Bozcaada (Tenedos) still needs to be fully implemented. 
No steps were taken to revise the relevant legislation on the issue of property rights of non-
Muslim minorities and legislation covering all issues of property rights.  
In the field of non-discrimination, legislation is still not in line with European standards or 
enforced fully in practice. There are serious concerns that the Law on Security Investigations 
and Archive Checks of April 2021 will lead to profiling and discrimination of those selected 


===== PAGE 40 =====
 
38 
 
and appointed to public posts as well as to further politicisation and stigmatisation of large 
sections of the society. This law introduces a wide range of factors – not restricted to past 
final convictions – when making investigations. The HREI, which is also in charge of 
applying non-discrimination legislation, only finalised 43 decisions in 2020 out of 276 
applications. School textbooks still need to be revised, especially regarding some content on 
secularism, religion and gender inequality. Turkey should urgently adopt a law on combating 
discrimination in line with the EU acquis as well as the ECHR, including sexual orientation 
and gender identity. No steps were taken to ratify Protocol 12 of the Convention, which 
provides for the general prohibition of discrimination, or to implement the recommendations 
of the Council of Europe’s European Commission against Racism and Intolerance. Hate crime 
legislation is still not in line with international standards and it does not cover hate offences 
based on sexual orientation, ethnicity, age or gender identity. Hate speech and hate crime are 
not prohibited by the anti-discrimination law. No progress was made towards the ratification 
of the Additional Protocol to the Convention on Cybercrime, concerning the criminalisation 
of acts of a racist and xenophobic nature committed through computer systems. 
In the area of gender equality there was important backsliding on women’s rights. Turkey’s 
withdrawal from the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combatting violence 
against women and domestic violence (the Istanbul Convention), followed by the adoption of 
a presidential decision in March 2021, represents a clear regression on the rights of women 
and girls. This decision compromises the women and girls’ rights and combatting gender-
based violence in Turkey, and sets a dangerous precedent. Following the withdrawal, hate 
speech increased in the media against women organisations. In July 2021, the Constitutional 
Court rejected the request for the suspension of the enforcement of the withdrawal and 
decided that it was within the President’s remit to withdraw from the Istanbul Convention. On 
1 June, the day Turkey officially withdrew from the Istanbul Convention, the President 
announced the Fourth National Action Plan for Combating Violence against Women (2021-
2025). 
The weak implementation of legislation and low quality of available support services, also 
exacerbated by a negative rhetoric from high-level officials and from some parts of the 
society against gender equality, remained of serious concern. Lack of judicial and 
administrative deterrence against perpetrators of crimes against women continued to be a 
matter of concern. A parliamentary commission was established to investigate the causes of 
violence against women and determine the measures to be taken. According to reports, 300 
women were killed in 2021 and another 171 women died under suspicious circumstances. 
Turkey lacks a comprehensive data collection system in this area to assess the scale and 
nature of the issue. In court cases of violence against women, discretionary mitigation 
continued to be applied.  
Other key issues are increased female unemployment and extreme poverty and hunger, 
especially in the east and south-east. Incest was reported by civil society to be increasing but 
there was no policy action or acknowledgement of this problem by the authorities. The 
promotion of stereotyped gender roles, including in the school textbooks and in the media, 
need to be addressed without delay. Statements by the Ministry of Interior targeting women’s 
organisations and feminists for alleged terrorist links threatened the existence of women’s 
associations. Independent women’s rights organisations continued to be largely excluded from 
the process of drafting relevant laws and developing policies and regulations regarding 
women’s issues. The Government should ensure that investigation and prosecution of 
domestic violence and the specialised services available to survivors and witnesses of 
violence are in line with international standards. 
There was limited progress on the rights of the child. In October 2020, a dedicated 


===== PAGE 41 =====
 
39 
 
department was established under the Ministry of Justice, mandated to promote rights and 
services for vulnerable groups in the justice system. Despite the improvement of meeting 
rooms in courts, problems in the juvenile justice system persist. Juveniles continued to face 
arrest and detention on charges of membership of terrorist organisations, often for long periods 
and not always in specialised institutions for children. The quality of legal aid for juveniles and 
rehabilitation activities continued to be a matter of concern. Despite steps taken to improve 
conditions in the detention centres, allegations of ill-treatment continued to be reported. The 
draft National Strategy and Action Plan for the Prevention of Early and Forced Marriage is yet 
to be adopted. With the COVID-19 pandemic, gaps widened regarding access to quality 
inclusive education. Child protection mechanisms and services remained limited. Refugee 
children and their families were at a heightened risk and faced specific challenges in accessing 
the national child protection system.  
Concerning the rights of persons with disabilities, Turkey lacks an independent 
implementation and monitoring framework in line with the UN Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities. Turkey lacks reliable, up-to-date data on the situation of persons 
with disabilities. The Ministry of Family, Labour and Social Services prepared a “vision 2030 
without barriers” policy document addressing the needs of persons with disabilities. 
Independent living and an inclusive, accessible society are among the eight priority policy 
areas. Turkey declared 2020 as the “Accessibility Year”, and launched a public information 
campaign including an accessibility award. An accessibility guideline for built environment 
was published. Still, the legal deadline for making public spaces more accessible was 
extended for the sixth time in July 2020. The number of accessible public buildings and 
public transport vehicles remained low and increased at a slow pace. The work of the National 
Monitoring and Evaluation Committee for the Convention needs to be stepped up. No 
national action plan on the rights of persons with disabilities is in place. Medical, charitable 
and paternalistic approaches remain dominant among the public and some public officials. 
Disability policies need to be mainstreamed across all policy areas and monitored with 
participation of disability organisations.  
A family based early identification and intervention programme was launched to address 
developmental risks of young children. Alternative care options for children with disabilities 
in institutions should be expanded. Turkey continued capacity-building activities to promote 
inclusive education services at all levels. However, school closures due to the COVID-19 
negatively affected access of children with disabilities to education, despite broadcasting 
school classes online and on TV. Participation at early childhood education level was 
particularly low. In the field of employment, the number of public servants with disabilities 
exceeded 57 000 in 2020, and the rate is close to 3 %. The employment rate in the private 
sector is much lower, partly due to limited physical accessibility, prejudices and skills 
mismatch. Turkey has no mental health legislation and no independent body to monitor 
mental health institutions. 
The lack of protection of the fundamental rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, 
intersex and queer (LGBTIQ) persons raised further serious concerns. Hate speech and 
smear campaigns by government officials and media against the LGBTIQ community 
increased, notably following the withdrawal from the Istanbul Convention and during the 
Boğaziçi students’ protests. In February, the Boğaziçi LGBTI+ Studies Club was closed by 
a rectorate decision without proper justification.   
High-level state officials regularly referred to national and moral values while targeting 
LGBTIQ. A criminal investigation was opened into the Ankara Bar Association after it filed 
a complaint against Diyanet’s President for his homophobic speech. The Minister of Interior 
and many media blamed the EU and the USA for funding LGBTIQ NGOs.  


===== PAGE 42 =====
 
40 
 
Discrimination, intimidation and violence against the LGBTIQ community continued to be 
a major problem, including against refugees. NGO reports indicated that a total of 1 476 hate 
speech items and discriminatory remarks about LGBTIQ were published in Turkish 
newspapers in 2020. Hate speech and crimes against LGBTIQ persons were not effectively 
prosecuted. In November 2020, the Ministry of Trade decided to impose an 18+ warning on 
"LGBT and rainbow-themed products" on e-commerce sites. The Ministry of Interior sent a 
letter to several city councils, inquiring about LGBTIQ councils, their activities and their 
budget. The court case against Middle East Technical University (METU) students who took 
part in a pride gathering on the university campus in May 2019 continued. The Regional 
Administrative Court approved the verdict of an Ankara administrative court to annul the 
"second indefinite ban on LGBTI+ activity" declared by the Governor's Office of Ankara in 
October 2018. Overall, freedom of assembly and association and freedom of expression for 
LGBTIQ NGOs was largely restricted. LGBTIQ activities and pride parades were banned or 
prevented by police in several provinces, including the biggest one in Istanbul, in June. The 
police intervened violently against a journalist and LGBTIQ demonstrators and at least 20 
persons were detained.  
On procedural rights, efforts are needed to further align legislation with European standards. 
Due to its failure to respect procedural rules, Turkey has been repeatedly condemned by the 
ECtHR for violating the right to a fair trial and presumption of innocence. The anti-Terror 
Law still bans access to defence during the first 24 hours of police custody and the maximum 
detention period of up to 12 days before the detainee is brought before a judge is still in place. 
The lack of professional interpretation services in judicial proceedings continued to be 
a problem. The authorities undermined fair trial guarantees by targeting lawyers for their 
professional activities. Lawyers continued to be subject to increasing pressure, taken into 
custody, detained, exposed to legal harassment through investigations and criminal 
proceedings. Those dismissed by state of emergency decrees continued to be often barred 
from acting as lawyers, with a few exceptions following the July 2020 judgement of the 
Constitutional Court that this was a violation of their right to exercise their profession.  
Hate speech and hate crime remain a serious issue for minorities. Acts of vandalism and 
destruction on minority worship places and cemeteries need to be investigated. Very few 
offenders were effectively prosecuted. No steps were taken to revise school textbooks to 
delete remnants of discriminatory references. The election of board members of minority 
foundations had been halted by the State since 2013 after annulment of the existing 
regulation. In March 2021, in a landmark ruling, an administrative court overruled the circular 
that had annulled the regulation. However, the Ankara Regional Court of Appeals recently 
decided that it is up to the Council of State (CoS) to decide on this issue. Therefore, minority 
foundations all over Turkey can still not hold their board member elections, pending the CoS 
judgement. In April 2021, a 25-month prison sentence was issued against a Syriac Orthodox 
Priest for allegedly aiding a terrorist organisation. State subsidies for minority schools had 
almost come to a halt. Subsidies to the newspapers run by members of the Armenian, Greek, 
and Jewish communities need to be granted by the Press Advertising Authority (BiK). The 
court case against public officials involved in the killing of Armenian journalist Hrant Dink in 
2007 ended in March 2021 with the acquittal of 37 of the 77 defendants. The files of 12 
defendants who fled Turkey were separated because they could not be heard in this trial. The 
Parliamentary Human Rights Inquiry Committee established a sub-committee to look into the 
rights violations during the recent war between Armenia and Azerbaijan. Full respect for and 
protection of language, religion, culture, cultural heritage and fundamental rights of minorities 
in accordance with European standards have yet to be achieved. As the Venice Commission 
underlined in 2010, Turkey should continue the reform process and introduce legislation, 


===== PAGE 43 =====
 
41 
 
which makes it possible for all non-Muslim religious communities to acquire legal 
personality. 
Concerning Roma, the Government declared 8 April as the “Roma Day”. Turkey’s first 
National Roma Strategy will expire in 2021 and has yielded limited results so far. A new 
national strategy is yet to be adopted. The authorities initiated measures to strengthen the 
monitoring and evaluation of the Strategy implementation but overall, the Roma community 
and independent civil society were not systematically and transparently involved. There are 
no sectoral strategies targeting Roma. The shift to distance education due to the COVID-19 
pandemic negatively affected the participation of Roma children and youth in education, in 
the absence of access to internet or appropriate devices by many poverty-stricken households. 
Allegations of abuse of Roma children by wrongly diagnosing them with mental disabilities 
or learning difficulties continued. Employment and living conditions of Roma citizens 
deteriorated severely in the reporting period as most Roma did not have fixed incomes. No 
specific housing programme for Roma was completed, while several urban transformation 
projects covered Roma populated districts. Due to lack of title deed ownership by most Roma 
families, projects ended up with Roma moving out to find shelter elsewhere.  
There is a need for increasing the availability of quality, relevant data for monitoring the 
socio-economic situation in Roma densely populated districts. A few cases of alleged hate 
speech towards Roma was reported and brought to courts by NGOs. The Ombudsman and the 
Human Rights and Equality Institution of Turkey did not carry out specific work on Roma 
inclusion. No public awareness campaign on the rights of Roma were conducted in the 
reporting period. Turkey needs to develop intersectoral campaigns on rights of Roma women, 
as a gender sensitive approach is missing in the National Roma Strategy. Turkey also needs to 
ensure sustainable inclusion of Roma and other vulnerable groups in post-COVID-19 
recovery measures. No EU-Turkey Joint Roma Seminar was held so far.  
On cultural rights, the Government did not legalise the provision of public services in 
languages other than Turkish. Legal restrictions on mother-tongue education in primary and 
secondary schools remained in place. In April 2021, the Minister of National Education stated 
that no language other than Turkish shall be taught as a mother tongue to Turkish citizens at 
any institution of education. Optional courses in Kurdish are provided in public state schools, 
as well as university programmes in Kurdish, Arabic, Syriac and Zaza. In March 2021, the 
Ministry announced quotas for teacher appointments, and only three teachers were allocated 
for Kurdish elective language courses throughout Turkey. The increased powers of the 
governors and arbitrary censorship continued having a negative impact on arts and culture, 
already negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Previous efforts of ousted HDP 
municipalities to promote the creation of language and culture institutions in these provinces 
were further undermined. Kurdish cultural and language institutions, Kurdish media outlets 
and numerous art spaces remained closed in the aftermath of the coup attempt, which 
contributed to a further shrinking of cultural rights. (See also Chapter 26 - Education and 
culture). 
2.2.3 Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security   
The EU has common rules for border control, visas, external migration and asylum. Schengen 
cooperation entails the lifting of border controls inside the EU. There is also cooperation in 
the fight against organised crime and terrorism, and judicial, police and customs 
cooperation. 
Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of justice, freedom and security. There was some 
progress, in particular in the area of migration and asylum policy. Some progress was made 


===== PAGE 44 =====
 
42 
 
on strengthening surveillance and protection capacity of the eastern land border. The return of 
irregular migrants from the Greek islands under the EU-Turkey Statement remained 
suspended since March 2020. Although the volume of irregular arrivals to Greece have fallen, 
smuggling routes to Italy and to the government-controlled areas of Cyprus are being 
increasingly used. Turkey has still not implemented the provisions relating to third-country 
nationals in the EU-Turkey readmission agreement, despite these entering into force in 
October 2017. Turkey continued to make significant efforts to host and meet the needs of 
almost four million refugees, and in preventing illegal crossings towards the EU. Turkey still 
needs to align its legislation on data protection with European standards. Most of the 
recommendations of last year were not addressed and remain valid. In the coming year, 
Turkey should in particular: 
 fully implement the EU-Turkey Statement of March 2016, notably the returns from 
Greece and the prevention of irregular routes to all Member States and implement all the 
provisions of the EU-Turkey readmission agreement towards all EU Member States; 
 align legislation on personal data protection with European standards, to allow for the 
conclusion of an international agreement for the exchange of personal data between 
Europol and Turkey; 
 revise legislation and practices on terrorism in line with the European Convention on 
Human Rights, European Court of Human Rights case-law and the EU acquis and 
practices. The proportionality principle should be observed in practice; 
 adopt and implement a strategy and action plan on border management with the aim to 
enhance coordination between border services at the national and international levels. 
Fight against organised crime 
Turkey has some level of preparation in the fight against organised crime; however there 
was limited progress overall. The majority of the recommendations from last year remain to 
be addressed. 
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular: 
 collect and use aggregate statistics to facilitate threat assessment, policy development and 
implementation and improve the track record on dismantling criminal networks and 
confiscating criminal assets; 
 improve the legal framework regulating the fight against money laundering and terrorist 
financing further to the 2019 Financial Action Task Force (FATF) Mutual Evaluation 
Report and in line with the recommendations of the Venice Commission regarding the law 
on the prevention of financing of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction; 
 improve its legislation on cybercrime and witness protection; 
 establish an Asset Recovery Office in line with the EU acquis; 
 conclude an international agreement on cooperation with Eurojust. 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
There are a number of specialised departments dealing with various forms of organised 
crime, under two main law enforcement agencies, namely the gendarmerie and the police 
under the Ministry of Interior (MoI). The Coast Guard Command is also an important force in 
the prevention of the crime of smuggling and trafficking in human beings. Operational 
capacity continued to be strengthened through new recruitments and trainings. 


===== PAGE 45 =====
 
43 
 
The legal framework for the fight against organised crime and police cooperation is partially 
aligned with the EU acquis. With the adoption of the law on prevention of financing of the 
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in December 2020, certain provisions were 
introduced to the Criminal Procedure Code and the Law on Prevention of the Financing of 
Terrorism regarding the confiscation of assets deriving from criminal activity (see below 
section on fight against terrorism).  
The Ministry of Interior continued the implementation of the 2019-2021 action plan for the 
implementation of the National Strategy on Fight against Organised Crime. This is the second 
action plan implemented in line with the Strategy setting out actions to reach the overall aims, 
including an effective institutional cooperation and coordination, as well as stronger 
international cooperation. The Ministry of Interior reported that the implementation rate of the 
Action Plan reached 90 %.  
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
Measures taken after the attempted coup of July 2016 continued to impact the professional 
capacity of the law enforcement agencies. In 2020, 126 personnel (officers, non-
commissioned officers, civil servants) from the Coast Guard Command were dismissed (104 
in 2019) mostly on the basis of terrorism-related investigations. Between January 2020 and 
April 2021, 2 915 personnel (officers, non-commissioned officers and specialised sergeants) 
from the gendarmerie were dismissed (2 304 in 2019) due to terrorism and other disciplinary 
charges. Around 14 900 personnel of the above categories have been recruited by the 
Gendarmerie and Coast Guard in the same period. 
In 2020, 41 707 cases of organised crime (Articles 314, 315 and 220 of the Turkish Criminal 
Code) were adjudicated in front of criminal courts. 17 305 of these cases resulted in 
convictions with 21 043 persons being convicted (in 2019, there were 1 544 cases with 2 374 
convictions). More than 600 operations have been carried out by the Gendarmerie and 
Turkish National Police (TNP) on organised crime, cybercrime, smuggling (including migrant 
smuggling and trafficking in human beings). 
The Gendarmerie strengthened its Department on Combatting Cybercrime with new human 
resources and trainings whereas the TNP carried out cyberpatrols working 24/7, including in 
the Dark Web. In 2020, 17 911 cases of cybercrime (Articles 243/1, 244, 103, 226 of the 
Turkish Criminal Code) were tried before a criminal court. 5 364 cases resulted in convictions 
of 5 778 persons. 
Concerning firearms trafficking, 2 749 small and light weapons (SALW) were seized by the 
Gendarmerie and 141 614 by the TNP in the reporting period. In 2020, 519 cases of firearms 
trafficking (Articles 12 of the Turkish Criminal Code) were brought before a criminal court, 
169 of these were concluded with a conviction involving 311 persons. 
Cooperation between Europol and Turkey is based on the Strategic Agreement on 
Cooperation since July 2004. The completion of an international agreement on the exchange 
of personal data between Europol and the Turkish authorities competent for fighting serious 
crime and terrorism is still pending as the Turkish data protection legislation is still not in line 
with the EU acquis. A Turkish Liaison Officer is seconded to Europol since 2016. 
In 2020, Turkey was involved in three cases of organised crime opened at Eurojust and 
participated in a coordination meeting organised in one of them. 
A Cooperation Agreement with the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Training 
(CEPOL) has been in place since 2010. Exchange programmes and training programmes were 
carried out involving the Gendarmerie and the TNP. 


===== PAGE 46 =====
 
44 
 
Turkey raised criticism on the high number of extradition requests linked to terrorism 
offences that were not accepted (notably by EU countries) on grounds of refugee status or 
citizenship granted to the person concerned. Turkey also raised concerns on the high number 
of red notices issued for individuals wanted for terrorism that were either denied or deleted by 
INTERPOL. 
Turkey continues to be an important transit and destination country for trafficking in human 
beings. By the end of 2020, the number of victims identified by Turkish authorities stood at 
282, representing a slight increase compared to 2019 when the number of victims identified 
was 215. By April 2021, 104 victims of trafficking in human beings have been identified. The 
majority of victims have been subject to sexual exploitation followed by labour force 
exploitation. In 2020, 88 cases of trafficking in human beings (Article 80 of the Turkish 
Criminal Code) were brought before criminal courts of Turkey. 16 of these concluded with 
the conviction of 30 offenders. 
In 2020, the Directorate General of Migration Management (DGMM) established a shelter for 
victims of human trafficking in Aydın, which brings the total capacity to hosts victims to 90. 
The Commission Coordinating the Fight against Human Trafficking encompassing 
representatives of DGMM, law enforcement agencies and the judiciary convened several 
times during 2020. Turkey provided various anti-trafficking training to law enforcements 
agencies, prosecutors and judges through national initiatives and funding from the 
international community. 
Turkey worked with the Council of Europe (CoE) to improve the prevention and fight against 
trafficking in human beings through the implementation of the relevant CoE Convention. A 
new action plan on trafficking in human beings called for by the CoE Group of Experts on 
Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (GRETA) is outstanding. Skills and efforts to 
identify victims of trafficking in human beings by law enforcement agencies and the judiciary 
need to be strengthened in particular when considering the large number of vulnerable persons 
in the country. Public awareness on indicators of victimhood need to be enhanced to 
discourage exploitation. Trafficking for sexual exploitation and slavery, of persons in need of 
international protection should be investigated and monitored closely. Reasons leading to lack 
of prosecution of the crime of trafficking in human beings should be identified. Data on 
criminal incidents, apprehensions linked to the crime of trafficking in human beings, 
prosecutions, sentences should be analysed to develop a corresponding response. 
Cooperation in the field of drugs 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
During the reporting period, no institutional changes were introduced. Turkey has developed a 
hierarchical multi-layer structure to fight against drug abuse. The High Council for the Fight 
against Drugs is responsible for inter-institutional coordination and monitoring. It includes all 
ministers involved in achieving the objectives of the National Strategy and Action to Combat 
Illegal Drugs for 2018-2023.  
The Turkish Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (TMCDDA), attached to the 
Turkish National Police, has been a full member of the European Monitoring Centre for 
Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA) since 2014. Its mandate is to monitor all aspects of 
the use and abuse of illicit drugs, both at national and international level. It is also in charge of 
drafting the annual Turkish Drug Report. The TMCDDA manages Turkey’s National Early 
Warning System (NEWS) on new psychoactive substances. A total of 928 new psychoactive 
substances have been included in the national legislation, 50 of which were put on the list in 
2020, and an additional 10 in the first quarter of 2021. TMCDDA’s newly developed ‘instant 


===== PAGE 47 =====
 
45 
 
data flow system’ became operational. The system uses encryption and anonymisation to 
safeguard personal data, while processing aggregate data for monitoring and reporting to 
European and international organisations. 
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
Turkey remains a transit route for drugs between Asia and Europe. In 2020, Turkish Law 
Enforcement conducted operations that resulted in the seizure of, inter alia, 93 741 221 kg of 
cannabis (including skunk), 1 960 kg of cocaine, 11 096 328 ecstasy tablets and 2 875 182 
captagon tablets. Compared to 2020, there was an increase in the seized amounts of cannabis, 
cocaine and ecstasy tablets, and a decrease in other mentioned illicit drugs. 
In 2020, a total of 54 325 cases (58 354 in 2019) involving 75 907 suspects (78 226 in 2019) 
were initiated by the prosecution for illicit drug related offences, with 18 478 suspects (21 482 
in 2019) convicted. Only 345 convictions were related to production and trafficking of drugs, 
while the rest concerned convicted dealers, suppliers and users. In the field of prevention, the 
Ministry of Health (MoH) operates 81 Counselling Centres in 64 provinces. In 2020, six new 
Centres became operational. In addition to MoH, Turkish NGOs also operate counselling 
centres. The Anti-Drug Counselling Hot Line received 52 660 calls in 2020. With the consent 
of the caller, return calls are made to monitor and follow up treatment processes. 
There are 133 treatment centres for drug dependence in 24 provinces. 55 of the centres focus 
on inpatient treatment, with nine dedicated for children. The remaining 78 are outpatient 
centres, with 11 serving children exclusively. Interpretation services are available in treatment 
centres. In 2020, outpatient and inpatient treatment was provided to almost 212 000 patients 
in these centres.  
Fight against terrorism 
Turkish efforts to tackle terrorism resulted in an improved security climate, but Turkey still 
faces threats from terrorist groups. The EU has condemned all acts of terrorist violence 
perpetrated in Turkey. The Government has a legitimate right and responsibility to fight 
terrorism, but efforts need to be undertaken in accordance with the rule of law, human rights, 
and fundamental freedoms. Amending the Anti-Terror Law and practices in line with EU 
standards and the EU acquis remains an essential step.  
In its threat perception, Turkey has prioritised the fight against the PKK and the dismantling 
of the Gülen movement. The PKK remains on the EU’s list of persons, groups and entities 
involved in acts of terrorism.  
Institutional set-up and legal alignment  
The General Directorate of Security of the Ministry of Interior has a specialised police unit 
responsible for counter-terrorism. The institutional capabilities are well-developed. Turkey 
needs to bring its legislation on terrorism and corresponding practices in line with European 
standards.  
Turkey also faces severe money laundering and terrorist financing risks. Aiming to mitigate 
these risks, Turkey has made progress in strengthening its anti-money laundering/countering 
the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) framework over the years. The Financial Crimes 
Investigation Board, in coordination with other relevant institutions, prepared a 
comprehensive national risk assessment document in 2018. In line with this document and 
outstanding Financial Action Task Force (FATF) recommendations, the country still needs to 
develop a comprehensive strategy and action plan on anti-money laundering and financing of 
terrorism. 


===== PAGE 48 =====
 
46 
 
In December 2020, Turkey adopted a law on the prevention of financing of the proliferation 
of weapons of mass destruction with a view to comply with relevant UN Security Council 
Resolutions and the FATF recommendations. The law also addresses the outstanding FATF 
recommendations on tightening rules and regulations regarding NGOs to prevent financing of 
terrorism. However, there are strong concerns that the implementation of the law could further 
restrict the legitimate activities of NGOs and put additional pressure on critical voices. The 
Venice Commission of the Council of Europe noted with concern that certain solutions 
chosen by the legislator go beyond the scope of the UN Security Council Resolutions and 
FATF recommendations, since the new provisions apply to all associations, irrespective of 
their goals and records of activities, and lead to far reaching consequences for basic human 
rights. The implementation of the Law, notably the provisions regulating the control of the 
NGOs, needs to be proportionate and pursue a risk-based approach. It is paramount that any 
measures taken to counter terrorism are in line with Turkey’s obligations under international 
law, and in particular international human rights law (see Chapter 23 - Judiciary and 
fundamental rights). 
The effectiveness and timeliness of the asset freezing mechanism improved. The government, 
for the first time since the adoption of the Law on the Prevention of Financing of Terrorism in 
2013, froze the assets of 377 people and organisations on grounds of terrorism-related charges 
in April 2021. Additionally, the most recent decisions of the United Nations Security Council 
Sanctions Committee were effectively implemented within 24 hours through Presidential 
Decisions in 2021. 
Implementation and enforcement capacity  
Turkey continued its efforts to fight home-grown and foreign terrorist fighter (FTF) cells. 
Cooperation continued with EU Member States on detecting and repatriating FTFs, which is 
one of the key areas of joint interest. Since 2011, Turkey issued entry bans for more than 
100 000 foreigners and deported more than 8 000 foreign terrorist fighters or suspected 
foreign terrorist fighters, of which over 1 000 in 2020. However, police and judicial 
cooperation with EU Member States and EU agencies in combating terrorism remained 
limited due to the absence of a personal data protection law in line with European standards 
and the EU acquis, and differences over the definition of, and penalties for, terrorist offences. 
Turkey should continue its efforts to effectively prevent and counter radicalisation leading to 
violent extremism and terrorism, in full compliance with fundamental rights.  
The Turkish financial intelligence unit (MASAK) developed a strong institutional capacity 
and in cooperation with other financial institutions, established a sound track-record during 
the reporting period. MASAK increased its staff number by 51 recruits and opened a new 
branch in Istanbul. The number of suspicious transaction reports submitted to MASAK 
reached 237 531 and the number of files analysed by MASAK stood at 10 298 in 2020. The 
number of convictions for money laundering increased in recent years. There were 53 
convictions for money laundering in 2018, which significantly increased to 95 convictions in 
2019, and 92 convictions in 2020. In February 2021, the Ministry of Justice issued a circular, 
which envisaged launching systematic inter-agency financial investigations in money 
laundering and terrorism financing investigations. Still, the track record as well as the 
cooperation between the law enforcement agencies, prosecution and financial intelligence 
agency need to be further improved. 
Legal and irregular migration 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 


===== PAGE 49 =====
 
47 
 
The Ministry of Interior’s Directorate-General of Migration Management (DGMM) is the key 
institution for managing migration in Turkey. The DGMM continued to employ a limited 
number of psychologists, social workers, interpreters, and lawyers, some of which are 
financed by the EU. Even though foreseen in the Law on Foreigners and International 
Protection, DGMM has still not established its overseas organisation in consulates of Turkey 
abroad. 
Turkey’s Strategy Document and National Action Plan on Irregular Migration covering the 
period 2019-2025 was endorsed by the Migration Board. The strategy was prepared with the 
technical assistance of the International Organisation for Migration (IOM), with EU financial 
support. The action plan identifies institutions in charge of each strategic priority, timelines 
and indicators to measure the effectiveness of implementation. A six-monthly reporting 
mechanism is set up to monitor the implementation of the plan.   
The implementing regulation following the amendment to the Law on Foreigners and 
International Protection introducing alternatives to detention, which entered into force in 
December 2019, still needs to be adopted. 
Turkey set up a National Assisted Voluntary Return mechanism. A cooperation protocol 
between DGMM, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Turkish Cooperation and Coordination 
Agency (TIKA) and the Red Crescent was signed in September 2020 to that end and a pilot 
return operation of 44 Afghanis was carried out in April 2021. 
In February 2021, the Ministry of Interior (MoI) published a regulation that allows the MoI to 
assign designated private areas as Intermediary Agencies for carrying out procedures linked to 
the issuance of residence permits for foreigners and submitting the applications to the 
provincial directorates for migration management (PDMMs) for a residence permit on their 
behalf.  
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
The EU-Turkey Statement continued to be the main framework of cooperation between the 
EU and Turkey on migration. Following the events at Pazarkule border crossing point 
between Turkey and Greece in March 2020, the rhetoric on non-prevention of irregular 
migration to the EU gradually toned down. Turkey expressed interest in the renewal of the 
EU-Turkey Statement on a number of occasions. 
According to the IOM, 72 migrants lost their lives in the Eastern Mediterranean in 2020. 
Additionally, at least 60 migrants died when a boat carrying them westwards sank in Lake 
Van in eastern Turkey. There was an average of around 40 daily irregular arrivals from 
Turkey to Greece in 2020, down from 202 in 2019. Migrants from Afghanistan, Syria and 
Somalia were recorded as the top three nationalities on the sea route to Greece, whereas 
nationals of Turkey, Afghanistan and Syria were the top three groups on the land route. 
Concerning the migratory routes to other Member States, Cyprus continued to be the second 
most common EU destination for irregular migrants arriving from Turkey (mostly via the 
non-government controlled areas). Overall, in 2020, around 5 800 irregular arrivals were 
recorded to Cyprus. Furthermore, the sea route to Italy saw an increase in smuggling activities 
with irregular arrivals from Turkey going up by more than 100 %. The total number of 
irregular arrivals from Turkey to the EU in 2020 was 18 736, against 75 974 in 2019. 
As of August 2021, the total number of arrivals from Turkey to the EU was still around 20 % 
lower compared to the same period last year. The migratory pressure at the Turkish-Greek 
land and sea borders remained low (roughly 60 % less compared to 2020), whereas sustained 
migratory activity continued to be register along the sub-route to Italy (more than 100 % 
increase). The total number of irregular arrivals to Cyprus also increased by more than 40 %. 


===== PAGE 50 =====
 
48 
 
In parallel, the number of irregular migrants apprehended within Turkey also substantially 
decreased from 454 662 in 2019 to 122 302 in 2020, due to border closures and global 
restrictions to movement brought by COVID-19, as well as the reduced intensity of 
smuggling activities. As in the past years, irregular migrants from Afghanistan, Syria and 
Pakistan were the most frequently apprehended nationalities. The Turkish Coast Guard 
rescued 20 380 irregular migrants at seas in the reporting period, compared to 60 802 in 2019. 
Turkey has persistently raised concerns about alleged migrant arrival prevention measures 
(so-called ‘pushbacks’) enforced by the Greek authorities in the Aegean Sea, but Greece has 
rejected these allegations. 
No progress was made as regards the full implementation of the EU-Turkey Readmission 
Agreement. Turkey maintained its position that it would not implement the provisions 
concerning third-country nationals until the visa requirement for its citizens travelling to the 
Schengen Area is lifted. EU Member States lodged 498 readmission requests for Turkish 
nationals; 344 were accepted by Turkey and 74 were effectively readmitted.  
Return of irregular migrants from the Greek islands was unilaterally suspended by Turkey on 
public health grounds in March 2020 and remained so as of June 2021. The Commission and 
Greece have repeatedly called on Turkey to resume return operations in line with the 
commitments made under the EU-Turkey Statement. The resumption of returns to Turkey 
remains key to effectively fight irregular migration and human smuggling networks in the 
region. Between 2016 and 2020, 2 140 persons, including 412 Syrian nationals, were 
readmitted to Turkey from Greece under the ‘One-for-One’ scheme. The bilateral 
Readmission Protocol between Greece and Turkey remained suspended. Turkey did not 
readmit third-country nationals from Bulgaria under either the bilateral border agreement or 
the EU-Turkey Readmission Agreement. 
 
As regards resettlement from Turkey to the EU under the ‘One-for-One’ scheme, 2 422 Syrian 
refugees were resettled to 11 Member States in the reporting period, despite the global 
suspension of resettlement operations in the first half of 2020 owing to the COVID-19 
outbreak. Moreover, the Resettlement Support Facility run by the European Asylum Support 
Office in Istanbul facilitated the processing of 1 017 resettlement candidates in 2020. The 
total number of Syrian refugees resettled from Turkey to the EU Member States under the 
‘One-for-One’ scheme reached 30 477 as of 22 August 2021. At the same time, 422 258 
Syrian refugees were voluntarily repatriated from Turkey to Syria between 2016 and 2020 
according to the government. Of these, 101 000 were monitored by the office of the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) with respect to the voluntary nature of 
the repatriations. 
Turkey effectively returned 41 379 irregular migrants to third countries in 2020, against 103 
858 in 2019. None of these was carried out within the scope of the readmission agreements 
that are in force between Turkey and third countries. Turkey did not sign any new 
readmission agreements in the reporting period. 
Currently, Turkey hosts a sizeable number of the Afghan refugees. According to the Turkish 
authorities, in August 2021, Turkey hosted 300 000 Afghan nationals, 182 000 of whom were 
registered with the authorities. However, given the growing negative perception of migrants 
in Turkey, the Turkish authorities stated that Turkey is not able to admit more migrants. 
Turkish authorities are committed to strengthen border control at the eastern and southern 
borders and to resume return operations to Afghanistan as soon as possible. The Turkish 
government deployed additional police and gendarmerie forces to the border area and took 
measures to improve their border surveillance system. The President also announced the 


===== PAGE 51 =====
 
49 
 
acceleration of the ongoing construction of the security wall on the border between Turkey 
and Iran. 
The number of removal centres stands at 26 with a total capacity of 16 108 people. 
Compared to the previous years, overcrowding was not observed in 2020, owing to the 
decrease in irregular crossings and apprehensions. Despite the increase in the number of 
lawyers handling cases in removal centres (from 4 187 in 2019 to 7 168 in 2020), access to 
legal counselling remained low, considering hundreds of thousands of migrants apprehended 
and placed in removal centres. Media, lawyers and NGOs reported incidents and allegations 
of human rights violations, including suicide, gender-based violence and barriers to accessing 
legal aid. The newly adopted human rights action plan foresees the establishment of an 
effective mechanism to review the complaints regarding the conditions in the Removal 
Centres. 
The number of foreigners legally residing in Turkey stood at 886 653 at the end of 2020, 
down from 1 101 030 in 2019. This decrease was a consequence of the travel restrictions, the 
backlog of pending applications that could not be processed due to the restrictions, and the 
new stricter rules on the renewal of tourism resident permits. Following the reintroduction in 
September 2018 of the lowered minimum amount of investment required to apply for Turkish 
investor citizenship scheme, 16 653 foreign investors received Turkish citizenship. Such 
schemes pose risks as regards security, money laundering, tax evasion, terrorist financing, 
corruption and infiltration by organised crime. As a candidate country, Turkey should refrain 
from any measure that could jeopardise the attainment of the EU’s objectives when using its 
prerogatives to award nationality (see Chapter 4 – Free movement of capital).  
DGMM carried out a series of meetings, trainings, and workshops with foreigners, students, 
academics, NGOs and staff of public administrations to implement the Harmonisation 
Strategy Document and National Action Plan adopted in 2018. Migration Information centres 
were set up in a number of provinces also with EU financial support. 
Asylum 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
The DGMM is the main institution responsible for all asylum-related procedures. The status 
determination processes are carried across the provincial directorates of migration 
management (PDMMs) and are harmonised by the International Protection Bureaus (Decision 
Centres) in Ankara and Istanbul, established in 2018 and 2019 respectively, with a view to 
reduce case backlog. Specialising on interviews and drafting decisions, these Decision 
Centres processed 2 480 applications in 2020. 
Legislation in this area is partially aligned with the EU acquis. The Law on Foreigners and 
International Protection maintains the reservation (geographical limitation) expressed in the 
New York Protocol of the 1951 Geneva Convention, according to which the vast majority of 
persons seeking international protection in Turkey cannot apply for fully-fledged refugee 
status but for ‘conditional refugee’ status and subsidiary protection only. Conditional refugee 
status limits the stay in the country ‘until the moment a recognised conditional refugee is 
resettled to a third country’. Syrian refugees are granted a specific refugee status under the 
Temporary Protection Regulation. 
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
Turkey continued to host the largest refugee community in the world, with 3.7 million Syrians 
under temporary protection and more than 320 000 non-Syrians including those who hold or 
applied for international protection status. The number of asylum seekers declined over the 


===== PAGE 52 =====
 
50 
 
reporting period; 31 334 international protection applications were lodged in 2020, down from 
56 417 in 2019. This is partly explained by overall decrease in cross-border migratory 
movements due to COVID-19 restrictions and reflects the global decrease in asylum 
applications. Of the 31 334 applications, 22 606 were Afghans, 5 875 were Iraqis and 1 425 
were Iranians. In 2020, Turkey granted international protection (refugee status, conditional 
refugee status or subsidiary protection) to 8 753 applicants, a notable increase from 5 449 in 
2019. The authorities rejected 10 674 applications compared to 5 212 in 2019.  
NGOs reported considerable challenges with access to registration in the first place, where 
individuals wishing to lodge an application in PDMMs are referred to other PDMMs, without 
a formal documentation and referral system. Such de-facto barriers to registration hinder 
access to all other essential services and put asylum seekers in an irregular situation if 
apprehended. Effective access to international protection at borders, airports and removal 
centres remain limited as reported by NGOs and lawyers. As of December 2020, 237 
interpreters worked at PDMMs and Decision Centres, particularly for status determination 
interviews. The availability of interpretation services needs to be further improved. 
While a large majority of Syrians are registered and reside in various provinces across 
Turkey, 57 321 Syrians are hosted in seven temporary accommodation centres, down from 63 
518 in 2019. Throughout 2020, the DGMM continued the verification of data of Syrians 
under temporary protection, updating and completing the information gathered during their 
original registration. In 2020, 895 499 new verification procedures were carried out. 
The DGMM uses GöçNet, a government database containing data on applicants for temporary 
and international protection, including biometric data in the form of photos and fingerprints. 
The police and gendarmerie have access to GöçNet. 
Cooperation between the DGMM and the European Asylum Support Office (EASO) 
continued in 2020 with the implementation of the EASO-DGMM Cooperation Roadmap 
2019-2021, which aims to support the DGMM in areas relating to country of origin 
information, training system, decision centres and mobile units, information management and 
analysis, people with special needs and contingency planning. 
The Turkish authorities increased efforts to facilitate entrance to the labour market and 
encourage legal employment. Applicants for international protection, conditional refugee 
status holders and people under temporary protection (Syrians) can apply for work permits. 
The COVID-19 pandemic increased the unemployment rate among refugees by 88 % since 
March 2020, with 63 % of them being food insecure, according to recent NGO reports. 
In 2020, the full operational budget of EUR 6 billion of the EU Facility for Refugees in 
Turkey (FRIT) was committed and contracted, with over EUR 4.2 billion disbursed by August 
2021. On top of the Facility, the EU also committed EUR 535 million to continue 
humanitarian support to refugees. The fifth annual report on the EU Facility for refugees in 
Turkey provides evidence of the results achieved so far, and how vital the Facility is in 
supporting refugees and host communities in Turkey. The Facility mobilises both 
humanitarian and development assistance for refugees and host communities in Turkey to 
meet basic needs, increase access to education and healthcare, including for vulnerable 
groups, children and women.     
Visa policy 
Turkey made no progress in meeting the six unfulfilled benchmarks of the visa liberalisation 
roadmap, namely on the anti-terror law, personal data protection legislation, the 
implementation of the EU-Turkey readmission agreement, cooperation agreement with 


===== PAGE 53 =====
 
51 
 
Europol, implementation of the GRECO recommendations on anti-corruption, and the judicial 
cooperation with all EU Member States. Negotiations are ongoing with a view to concluding 
an international agreement between Europol and Turkey.  
Turkey changed its visa policy towards Iraqi nationals by abolishing the possibility of 
electronic visa and lifted the passport requirement for short stays entries for the nationals of 
Azerbaijan. 
Turkey needs to further harmonise its visa policy with the EU’s visa policy. This would 
include further aligning Turkish visa requirements with the EU lists of visa-free and visa-
required countries, full phasing-out of the issuing of visas at borders (currently citizens of 24 
countries are eligible to obtain visa on arrival) and of electronic visas, and ensuring that the 
issuing of visas at its diplomatic missions is carried out in line with the conditions and 
procedures set out in the EU Visa Code. Turkey continues to apply a discriminatory visa 
regime towards Cyprus, while it has abolished short stay visa requirements for 26 EU 
Member States. 
Schengen and external borders 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
During the reporting period, no new legislation was adopted. The coordination of the work of 
the state bodies dealing with border management matters is the responsibility of the 
Directorate-General of Provincial Administration under the Ministry of Interior (MoI). The 
Border Management Implementation Board, which should meet twice a year, met for the 
fourth time in October 2020 since its establishment in 2016. Its supervising body, the 
Integrated Border Management Coordination Board, has not met so far. 
The National Coordination and Joint Risk Analysis Centre in Ankara, which was also 
formally established by the above Regulation in 2016 and which has received significant EU 
funding, has not become operational yet. 
In February 2021, the institute of Heads of Civil Border Administration was established by 
Presidential Decree, taking over the border management responsibilities from Governors in 
eleven border regions (mostly in the East of the country). The basic aim of this reform step 
was to strengthen coordination of border management matters at central level under the 
supervision of Directorate-General of Provincial Administration. In addition, two departments 
of the MoI in charge of irregular migration matters, the Counter Trafficking of Migrants and 
the Border Gates Departments, were merged into one service in 2020. 
In order to bring the country’s border management system in line with the EU acquis, Turkey 
should further enhance inter-service and international cooperation, accelerate the adoption of 
an Integrated Border Management (IBM) strategy and update its National Action Plan to 
Implement Turkey’s IBM Strategy of 2006. It also needs to enact new legislation to set up a 
non-military border management body in charge of all aspects of border management, 
including border surveillance at the ‘green’ border, which is currently under the responsibility 
of the Turkish Land Forces. Turkey has committed to remove all anti-personnel landmines by 
31 March 2022, in order to fulfil its obligations under the Ottawa Treaty. So far, only a small 
border stretch of a total of 2 949 km has been cleaned entirely. Turkey needs to increase 
substantially national investment to clean mined areas along the border with Syria, Iraq, Iran, 
Armenia as well as inside Turkey. Significant financial support for de-mining is currently 
provided by the EU. 
Implementation and enforcement capacity 


===== PAGE 54 =====
 
52 
 
Turkey continued investing significant efforts and financial means in the modernisation of 
border security at the land frontier. After the construction of a wall and a barbed-wire fence, 
along the Syrian border, similar works, including the installation of modern communication 
and surveillance masts, continued at the Iranian border, partially funded by the EU. Identical 
masts are being erected also at the Western land border.  
Relations with the European Border and Coast Guard Agency (Frontex), which are based on 
a three-year Cooperation Plan covering the period 2020-2022, were negatively impacted by 
incidents at the Greek-Turkish land border and the Aegean Sea. Turkey does not participate 
in Joint Operations of Frontex. Frontex has a liaison officer permanently based in Ankara. 
Cooperation with neighbouring Greece and Bulgaria in the framework of a trilateral Police 
and Customs Co-operation Centre at the Bulgarian-Turkish border crossing point Kapitan 
Andreevo/Kapıkule continued. 
Judicial cooperation in civil and criminal matters 
Judicial cooperation in civil and commercial matters is regulated by the Law on International 
Civil Law and Procedural Law, circulars, and international conventions. Turkey is a party to 
most of the international conventions. Turkey still needs to accede to relevant international 
conventions in the area of civil justice, many of which were drawn by the Hague Conference 
on Private International Law, including in particular the Hague Convention of 30 June 2005 
on Choice of Court Agreements. Turkey has not yet ratified the European Convention on the 
Compensation of Victims. More effective measures are needed to ensure an acceptable 
reduction in delays to proceedings resulting from the 1980 Hague Convention on civil 
aspects of international child abduction and to foster the use of international mediation in 
such cases.  
The main legislation governing the judicial cooperation in criminal matters is in place since 
2016 and Turkey has acceded to most of the international conventions. The new legislation 
entails new mechanisms to speed up the international judicial cooperation in criminal matters, 
which has started to yield positive results. 13 mutual legal assistance requests following the 
introduction of video conferencing have been processed, out of which two have been 
finalised. Under the new ‘consensual extradition’ procedure, extradition of an offender now 
takes 1-2 months in average as opposed to classic extradition procedure lasting around a year. 
As for the transfer of sentenced persons, introduction of the procedure of ‘exact execution’ 
paved the way to the removal of the obligation of local courts to comply with the domestic 
legislation. In 2020, under the new procedure, overall 42 convicts were transferred to Turkey 
from other countries, while five convicts were transferred from Turkey to other countries. 
However, the independence and accountability of the justice system has to be substantially 
strengthened for a smooth application of the principle of mutual recognition of judgements 
and court decisions in criminal matters. 
During 2020, trainings on conventions on international legal assistance and corruption and on 
the effective use of international cooperation and the investigation methods of offences on 
financing of terrorism and money laundering were provided to 1 146 candidate judges and 
prosecutors. 
In 2020, EU Member States accepted six extradition requests from Turkey, while 50 were 
rejected and 150 are pending. There were four extradition requests from EU Member States, 
which are all pending. EU Member States accepted five transfers of convicts to Turkey and 
Turkey accepted four transfers to EU Member States. Six contact points have been designated 
by Turkey to coordinate and follow-up judicial cooperation with EUROJUST. In 2020, 
Turkey was involved in 22 EUROJUST cases on terrorism, cybercrime, migrant smuggling, 


===== PAGE 55 =====
 
53 
 
corruption and fraud, an 83 % increase compared to the previous year (12 cases). However, 
the personal data protection law is not yet in line with European standards, which prevents the 
start of negotiations for an agreement with the EU on cooperation with EUROJUST. 
Cooperative relations should be established also with the European Public Prosecutor’s Office 
(EPPO), which started its operational activities in June 2021.  
2.3 ECONOMIC CRITERIA 
 
In line with the conclusions of the European Council in Copenhagen in June 1993, EU 
accession requires the existence of a functioning market economy and the capacity to cope 
with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union. 
Economic governance has become even more central in the accession process in recent years. 
The Commission's monitoring takes place in two processes: the Economic Reform 
Programme exercise and the assessment of compliance with the economic criteria for 
accession. Each enlargement country prepares an annual Economic Reform Programme 
(ERP), which sets out a medium-term macro-fiscal policy framework and a structural reform 
agenda aimed at ensuring competitiveness and inclusive growth. The ERPs are the basis for 
country-specific policy guidance jointly adopted by the EU and the Western Balkans and 
Turkey at ministerial level each year. 
2.3.1. The existence of a functioning market economy 
The Turkish economy is well advanced, but made no progress over the reporting period and 
serious concerns persist over its functioning. 
2018
2019
2020
Turkey - Key economic figures
GDP per capita (% of EU-27 in PPS)1)
64
63
59
64
Real GDP growth 
5.9
3.0
0.9
1.8
Economic activity rate of the population aged 15-64 (%), total1)
55.6
58.5
58.4
54.9
      female
34.5
38.3
38.7
35.0
      male
76.7
78.5
78.1
74.6
Unemployment rate of the population aged 15-64 (%), total1)
10.0
11.1
14.0
13.4
      female
12.3
14.0
16.7
15.1
      male
9.0
9.7
12.6
12.6
Employment of the population aged 15-64 (annual growth %)
2.72)
1.8
-2.4
-4.3
Nominal wages (annual growth %)
12.4
18.3
26.2
18.0
Consumer price index (annual growth %)
8.6
16.3
15.2
12.3
Exchange rate against EUR
3.05
5.68
6.35
8.10
Current account balance (% of GDP)
-4.4
-2.8
0.9
-5.2
Net foreign direct investment, FDI (% of GDP)
1.1
1.2
0.8
0.6
General government balance (% of GDP)1)
-0.5
-2.8
-3.2
-2.8
General government debt (% of GDP)
29.2
30.2
32.6
39.83)
Notes: 
1) Eurostat
2) 2015-2017
3) State government
Source: national sources
2012-17 
average


===== PAGE 56 =====
 
54 
 
The authorities delivered a sizeable and wide-ranging set of measures to boost domestic 
demand and soften the economic repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, the 
economy rebounded quickly from the crisis, reaching pre-crisis levels already in the third 
quarter of 2020. Amid a strong policy response to the crisis, institutional and policy 
coordination weaknesses undermined the credibility and effectiveness of authorities’ actions 
and imbalances increased. The macroeconomic policy mix relied too heavily on the credit 
channel, while direct fiscal support measures were rather limited in view of the magnitude of 
the social and labour market challenges. The strong monetary expansion last year weakened 
the lira, increased inflation and dollarisation, and triggered portfolio outflows. The closing of 
the current account deficit in 2019 turned out to be short-lived and external imbalances 
remain a major vulnerability. Monetary policy tightened in autumn 2020 but the abrupt 
dismissal of the central bank governor in March 2021, only four months after his 
appointment, stirred financial market instability and called into question the authorities’ 
commitment to reducing inflation. 
The institutional and regulatory environment weakened further and there are persistent issues 
with predictability, transparency, and implementation of regulations. Market exit remained 
costly and slow. The informal sector declined during the crisis but remains large. State 
intervention in price setting mechanisms persists. The provision of State aid lacks proper 
implementation rules, enforcement and transparency. Supported by loose monetary policy 
until the autumn 2020 and favourable regulatory measures, bank lending grew strongly, 
spurred in particular by state-owned banks. The banking sector remained well capitalised, 
benefiting from regulatory forbearance and other crisis-mitigation measures. The pandemic 
had a deeply negative impact on the labour market and poverty. The number of discouraged 
workers increased significantly and employment levels fell far below their height a few years 
ago. Female labour market participation and employment remained at particularly low levels. 
The proportion of young people not in employment, education or training increased. 
The Commission’s recommendations from 2020 were not fully implemented and remain 
valid. In order to improve the functioning of the market economy Turkey should in particular: 
 rebalance the policy mix towards a tighter monetary policy stance and use part of the 
available fiscal space for a targeted increase of budget expenditure to soften the crisis 
impact on the labour market and alleviate poverty; 
 strengthen the independence of the central bank and improve monetary policy credibility 
in order to anchor inflation expectations and stabilise the exchange rate; 
 strengthen the business environment, reduce state interference in price setting, and 
enhance the transparency and control of State aid; 
 step up active labour market policies, in particular for young people and women, as well 
as the social dialogue. 
Economic governance 
Despite a strong policy response to the crisis, institutional and policy coordination 
weaknesses undermined the credibility and effectiveness of authorities’ actions. Turkey 
delivered a sizeable and wide-ranging set of measures to boost domestic demand and soften 
the economic repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic. This helped the economy to return 
quickly to growth, being one of the few in the world to avoid a contraction last year. 
However, the excessive reliance on the credit channel weakened the lira, depleted foreign 
exchange reserves, and increased inflation, dollarisation, external imbalances and inequalities. 
Monetary policy has slowly reversed course in the summer of 2020 and tightened more 


===== PAGE 57 =====
 
55 
 
decisively since November under the watch of a new central bank governor. However, the 
abrupt dismissal of the governor in March 2021, barely four months into office, has called this 
policy shift and the turn to a simplified and more transparent policy framework into question. 
Maintaining a sufficiently tight monetary policy stance over a prolonged period remains a 
challenging task, as demonstrated by a long history of missed targets and rapid policy 
reversals. The frequent changes at the helm of the central bank are the starkest manifestation 
of continued institutional weakness in the country’s Presidential system. Successive changes 
of the head of the statistical institute (TURKSTAT) and the fast dismantling of newly created 
advisory boards on price statistics and labour market undermined TURKSTAT’s 
independence and credibility. The policy guidance jointly agreed at the May 2020 Economic 
and Financial Dialogue between the EU and the Western Balkans and Turkey was 
implemented partially, with the rate of implementation improving over previous years. 
Macroeconomic stability 
The Turkish economy was resilient and rebounded quickly from the crisis, but the 
recovery was uneven across sectors. Following a short-lived contraction in the second 
quarter due to containment measures, real GDP reached pre-crisis levels already in the third 
quarter of 2020. Overall, a large policy stimulus and a strong growth momentum shortly 
before the pandemic helped the economy 
expand by 1.8 % in 2020. The good 
performance extended into the first two 
quarters of 2021 with growth rates of 
7.2 % and 21.7 % y/y, respectively. After 
contracting in 2019, domestic demand 
returned to growth in 2020. Favourable 
monetary conditions strongly supported 
robust 
private 
consumption 
and 
investment. An outsized build-up of 
stocks, another important contributor to 
growth, has started to unwind only by the end of 2020. Import growth remained relatively 
strong, affected by exceptionally high non-monetary gold imports, but retracted since the 
fourth quarter of 2020 and turned negative in early 2021. After the initial shock from the 
pandemic, exports of goods rebounded quickly. They gathered pace along with the firming up 
of global demand and as price competitiveness gains supported a further expansion of 
Turkey’s market share in some non-EU markets. The economic recovery, however, remained 
uneven because of the high exposure to international tourism and transport – two of the most 
heavily affected sectors in the pandemic, which still feel its impact. Due to tepid pre-crisis 
growth, resulting from the unwinding of imbalances after the currency turmoil of 2018, 
Turkey’s real income convergence with the EU reversed – in 2019 its per capita GDP in 
purchasing power standards was only 59 % of the EU average, down from a high of 68 % in 
2015. However, it rebounded to 64 % in 2020 as the Turkish economy performed much better 
in comparison to a strong decline in the EU. 
The closing of the current account deficit in 2019 turned out to be short-lived and 
external imbalances remain a major vulnerability. With domestic demand returning to 
growth, higher import of non-monetary gold due to increased financial instability, and a 
crisis-induced weakening in exports, the 
current account moved back to a deficit of 
5.2 % of GDP in 2020. The deficit declined 
somewhat in the beginning of 2021, driven 
by the recovery in exports of goods, imports 
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Graph 1: Turkey - Real GDP growth and 
contributions
Priv. cons.
Gov. cons.
GFCF
Stocks
Net exports
real GDP growth
Source: Macrobond, own calculations
% y-o-y
-6
-3
0
3
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Graph 2: Turkey - Current account selected 
components and FDI
 Workers' Remittances balance
Goods and services trade balance
Current account balance
Net FDI
% of GDP
Source: IMF and Central Bank of Turkey


===== PAGE 58 =====
 
56 
 
suppression, and lower gold imports. However, it remained relatively high, reflecting the 
strength of domestic demand, still subdued service exports, and negative terms of trade due to 
global commodity price increases. The strong monetary expansion in 2020 not only weakened 
the lira but also triggered financial market instability and portfolio outflows. Official foreign 
exchange reserves have been the main source of financing of these outflows and of the 
widening current account deficit. As a result, central bank reserves currency composition 
worsened and reserves fell by more than 20 %, to their lowest level in a decade, while its net 
foreign assets (excluding borrowed funds) turned negative. Net foreign direct investment has 
further declined in recent years and remained marginal, despite growing price 
competitiveness. 
Turkey remains highly exposed to geopolitical risks and changes in global financing 
conditions. Geopolitical tensions, rising economic imbalances and overall policy uncertainty 
affected negatively the country risk premium and investor confidence in Turkey. With the 
exception of the short period between November 2020 and March 2021, marked by clear steps 
towards monetary policy normalisation, the five-year credit default swaps remained elevated 
above 350 basis points. The depreciation of the lira drove the external debt ratio further up to 
62.7 % of GDP at the end of 2020. Turkey’s external position, thus, is very vulnerable amidst 
an uncertain geopolitical environment and in view of a possible tightening of global financing 
conditions. The continued ability in particular of the banking sector to roll over its short-term 
external debt and the improvement in the short-term positive net foreign exchange position of 
the non-financial sector are key factors attenuating this vulnerability. 
Inflation increased and price pressures have become entrenched primarily due to the 
lack of monetary policy credibility. The weakness of the lira, which lost 24 % against the 
U.S. dollar in 2020 and another 14 % by mid-June 2021, continued to be a major inflationary 
factor. In addition, food prices increased markedly by the end of 2020 and have remained 
elevated since then. Persistently high food price inflation not only hurts disproportionately the 
poor, but also points to deep-rooted structural problems in the agricultural sector, like long 
supply chains and underdeveloped logistics and storage. Thus, despite lower energy prices in 
2020, inflation stayed in the double-digits, ending 2020 at 14.6 %. As energy and other 
commodity prices increased since the beginning of 2021, inflation picked up further to 
19.25 % y/y in August. Producer prices also continued their steep rise, from 5.5 % y/y last 
May to 45.5 % in August 2021, pointing to persistent inflationary pressures. The central bank 
was slow to react to rising inflation last year and started to tighten its policy only in August 
2020. It tightened more decisively under a new central bank governor who, between 
November and March, raised the key policy rate by 875 basis points to 19 %. However, his 
abrupt dismissal triggered financial market instability and called into question the authorities’ 
commitment to reducing inflation. The policy rate has remained unchanged since March, 
despite increasing inflation and inflationary expectations. The frequent dismissals of central 
bank governors and recurrent pressure by the authorities on monetary policy decision-makers 
to lower interest rates severely undermine the bank’s independence and its credibility and 
come at the cost of higher country risk premiums, and exchange rate and financial market 
instability. 
Fiscal policy tightened at the height of 
the crisis, despite numerous crisis-
related measures. The fiscal support 
package to cushion the crisis impact 
amounted to slightly more than 2 % of 
GDP, while most of the support (around 
10 % of GDP) was off budget in the form 
0
10
20
30
40
-6
-4
-2
0
2
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Graph 3: Turkey - Fiscal developments
Primary balance (lhs)
Interest (lhs)
GG balance (lhs)
Public Debt (rhs)
Source: National sources
% of GDP


===== PAGE 59 =====
 
57 
 
of new or deferred loans backed by public guarantees. At central government level, the budget 
deficit was 3.4 % of GDP in 2020 – significantly below the revised target of 4.9 % of GDP. 
The general government deficit declined from 3.2 % of GDP in 2019 to 2.8 % of GDP in 
2020, notwithstanding a sharp increase in interest payments and lower revenue from the 
central bank. The growing domestic demand and targeted tax increases on certain goods, such 
as motor vehicles, supported revenue. There was a rather modest increase in social spending 
and transfers to households and limited tax reductions and payment deferrals. However, the 
good revenue performance and cuts in government consumption and investment expenditure 
outweighed the impact of these measures on the deficit and allowed the government to reduce 
the budget deficit and achieve a better than planned result in 2020. While signalling a return 
to strict spending discipline, which had been a major economic policy asset until 2017, fiscal 
policy tightened in the midst of the crisis, restraining its support to the economy. The recently 
revised 2021 deficit took into account the better than planned revenue performance in 2020 
(by 2.5 % of GDP) and cut the central government deficit target by 0.7 percentage points to an 
estimated 3.5 % of GDP. Although the budget deficit outperformed targets by a wide margin, 
government debt continued rising. It went up by close to 7 percentage points to 39.8 % of 
GDP in 2020 and continued growing in early 2021 mainly because of the depreciation of the 
lira. In addition, fiscal risks related to various contingent liabilities increased as well. 
The macroeconomic policy mix relied too heavily on the credit channel and a loose 
monetary policy. Monetary policy overreacted to the crisis and the excessive credit creation 
spilled over to weaken the lira, worsen financial market volatility, and increase inflation. 
Direct fiscal support measures, on the other hand, were rather limited in view of the 
magnitude of the social and labour market challenges. Hence, a rebalancing of the policy mix 
towards a tighter monetary policy stance and using part of the available fiscal space for 
a targeted increase of budget expenditure would be needed. Institutional weaknesses, low 
policy credibility and geopolitical risks seriously undermine the effectiveness of the policy 
mix. 
Functioning of product markets 
Business environment 
Turkey’s institutional and regulatory environment weakened, while government 
intentions to improve the business climate are at an early stage. Starting a business is still 
relatively cumbersome, while market exit has also remained costly and time-consuming. 
Nevertheless, the pandemic intensified both market entry and exits. The number of newly 
established businesses increased by 20.5 % in 2020 as compared to 2019. In parallel, the 
number of liquidated companies increased by 9.9 % and the number of closed ones by 16.4 % 
during the same timeframe. There has been further backsliding in the areas of contract 
enforcement and insolvency resolution. Even though alternative dispute resolution 
mechanisms have been promoted, commercial judicial processes are slow and a large backlog 
of commercial court cases remains. The implementation of the legislation to improve the 
insolvency system is behind schedule and the process remains inefficient. In order to mitigate 
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on businesses, all pending and new enforcement and 
bankruptcy procedures were put on hold until 15 June 2020 and concordat proceedings were 
suspended as well. Turkey lacks a systematic consultation mechanism with business 
organisations and social partners during the preparation of new legislation. 
There has been serious backsliding in recent years with regard to the judicial system. 
Regulatory enforcement and the constraints on government power worsened the most, while 
scores on fundamental rights and open government declined from already low levels. The 
Government adopted a Human Rights Action Plan and an Economic Reform Package in 


===== PAGE 60 =====
 
58 
 
March 2021, envisaging a number of actions, including the development of alternative dispute 
resolution methods, strengthening specialised courts and reviewing public procurement 
legislation. Turkey further improved its performance in the area of property rights. However, 
intellectual property right enforcement remains very weak (see Chapter 7). The number of 
companies managed under the trusteeship of the Savings Deposits Insurance Fund is still 
high. As of the end of 2020, the management of 796 companies based in 38 provinces across 
Turkey with a total asset value of TRY 70.3 billion (EUR 7.8 billion) and with a total of 
40 061 employees, remained under the trusteeship of the Fund. Neither a schedule for 
resolving the release of all companies from trusteeship, nor appropriate, effective and timely 
means of legal redress are in place. 
The informal sector remained structurally high, representing a considerable share of 
economic activity, well above the OECD average. The share of unregistered employment 
fell below 30 % in 2020, mainly due to the decline in informal jobs in sectors seriously 
affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, such as tourism and construction. The authorities 
continued to implement the Action Plan and Strategy for the fight against the informal 
economy (2019-2021). The results of the actions taken so far are, however, difficult to assess. 
Among others, the Revenue Administration aims to increase the level of voluntary 
compliance, strengthen audit capacity, review and regulate the legislation, enhance inter-
agency data sharing and increase awareness, but no concrete performance indicators against 
which to measure progress had been set. 
State influence on product markets 
The state continues intervening in the price-setting mechanism in key sectors. More than 
a quarter of the consumer basket is composed of goods whose prices are set or heavily 
influenced by public authorities (price limits, tax rate adjustments). Meanwhile, Turkish 
regulators have been carrying out intensive price audits across all provinces to investigate 
unfair pricing and stockpiling practices. In 2020, 495 firms have been found guilty of 
charging exorbitant prices, mostly on food, protective masks, sanitizers and other basic goods. 
The total amount of the administrative fines imposed by the Unfair Price Evaluation Board 
reached TRY 15.5 million. Within the scope of COVID-19 pandemic measures, Turkey 
reduced the VAT for a comprehensive list of goods and services from 18 % to 8 % and from 
8 % to 1 % for others until the end of July 2021. VAT for private education services (for 
2020-2021 academic years) was also lowered from 8 % to 1 %. The delivery of the COVID-
19 vaccines will also be subject to a reduced VAT rate until 31 December 2021. 
State aid transparency and control remained weak. Legislation to implement the State aid 
law, originally scheduled to be passed a decade ago, has still not been adopted. Turkey has not 
formally set up a comprehensive State aid inventory or adopted an action plan to align all 
State aid schemes with the EU acquis. Additionally, Turkey has abolished the administrative 
structure responsible for implementing State aid legislation, while transferring its mandate to 
the Economic Policies Council. The Directorate-General for Economic Programs and 
Research, established in 2019 under the Ministry of Treasury and Finance, was assigned the 
role of coordinating State aid. The current structure of State aid control is considered neither 
independent nor operational (see Chapter 8). The project-based support reached 34 projects 
with an investment amount of TRY 115.2 billion as of June 2021. Small and medium 
enterprises (SMEs) benefit from numerous support measures and initiatives, for which there is 
a lack of systematic monitoring, and evaluations are at an early stage. 
Privatisation and restructuring 
The pace of privatisation has lost momentum, partly due to the crisis, while the 
sovereign wealth fund expanded its hold in key sectors of the economy. Privatisation 


===== PAGE 61 =====
 
59 
 
receipts decreased sharply over the last three years, from USD 1.4 billion in 2018 to USD 22 
million in 2020. The privatisation of state-owned sugar factories has been ongoing in the 
reporting period. For 2021, the Privatisation Administration has targeted the privatisation of 
electricity generation plants, ports, inspection services for legal metrology and real assets. 
Government assets owned by the Turkey Wealth Fund (TWF) appear to be ring fenced from 
privatisation. The TWF holds shares in major companies in the financial, telecommunications, 
petrochemicals, real estate, mining, agriculture and transport sectors. In 2020, it increased 
further its presence in the telecommunications and financial sectors. It took over public 
insurance and individual pension companies with the aim of consolidating them and 
increasing its share in the non-banking financial industry in Turkey. While remaining the 
largest shareholder in Borsa Istanbul, it sold 10 % of its shares to the Qatar Investment 
Authority in November 2020. The TWF made some progress towards meeting the Santiago 
principles on transparency and accountability by publishing its activity reports and 
consolidated financial statements for the years 2018 and 2019, but there is still room for 
improving transparency. According to its consolidated financial statements, at the end of 
2019, its total assets amounted to TRY 1.5 trillion (34 % of GDP). The TWF continues 
benefiting from certain exemptions from the rules, granted following the outbreak of the 
COVID-19 pandemic to support companies of strategic importance in distress. These 
exemptions are mostly related to (publicly held) corporations’ transactions, merger and 
acquisition, unlawful exercise of control, and shareholders’ rights. 
Functioning of the financial market 
Financial stability 
The financial sector went through a rapid expansion, but faces adjustment needs in view 
of the upcoming lifting of forbearance measures. Commercial banks, state-owned banks in 
particular, were the main vehicle of the policy response to the crisis. Despite rapid credit 
growth, the banking sector remained broadly stable, partly thanks to the relief provided by 
forbearance measures. The capital adequacy ratio of the banking sector declined somewhat in 
early 2021, but at 17.5 % in July it was still above the regulatory minimum and historic 
averages. Pandemic-related incentives, which were extended until September 2021, continued 
to affect positively bank capital positions. Regulatory measures (extension of the period for 
delinquent loans to be classified non-performing to 180 days and postponement of loan 
instalments) and the rapid growth in lending had a strong impact on the non-performing loan 
(NPL) ratio, which even declined from 5.3 % in the beginning of 2020 to 3.7 % in July 2021. 
Stage 2 loans (loans for which the risk of non-payment has increased significantly) have also 
remained broadly stable at around 11 % over this period, although loan restructuring 
continued to cloud proper assessment. Bank profitability declined somewhat from an already 
low level because of increased funding and provisioning costs and lower income from fees. 
Profitability continued to be lower in state-owned banks, largely because of the authorities’ 
heavy reliance on these banks to boost lending. The dollarisation of the system increased from 
an already high level as the private sector’s desire to hedge against exchange rate volatility 
triggered a further expansion in foreign exchange and gold deposits, with their share rising 
from around half of all deposits in mid-2020 to 56 % in June 2021. Despite an increased 
country risk premium spilling over to their creditworthiness, commercial banks managed to 
maintain the rollover ratio of their external loans consistently above 90 % and continued to 
manage their excess foreign exchange liquidity through the swap markets. 
Access to finance 
Supported by loose monetary policy and strong regulatory measures, bank lending grew 
strongly. The authorities took wide-ranging measures to stimulate credit and provide liquidity 


===== PAGE 62 =====
 
60 
 
support to the economy. Consequently, loan growth accelerated rapidly in 2020. Although it 
slowed down as monetary policy changed course and regulatory changes expired in the 
autumn of 2020, total credit increased significantly since the beginning of 2020 to 66 % of 
GDP in June 2021. State-owned banks have led the lending spree and expanded their market 
share. Credit increased strongly both in the corporate and retail segment last year, spurred also 
by the support offered by the Credit Guarantee Fund, which doubled its allowable loan limits 
and extended its mandate beyond SMEs to households. While decelerating markedly in early 
2021, the growth of household loans still remained robust until mid-2021. Total bank assets 
increased from 104 % of GDP in 2019 to 121 % in 2020, while the share of foreign-owned 
banks in total assets declined slightly from 26.5 % to 25.1 %. The interest rate spread between 
USD commercial loans and deposits has declined since the beginning of 2020 and was around 
its long-term average in the first half of 2021. The spread in lira increased also approached its 
average but from a low level. 
Functioning of the labour market 
The pandemic had a major negative impact on employment and poverty. The labour 
market had not yet fully recovered from the 2018 recession, when the pandemic hit. Repeated 
lockdowns and reduced economic activity, in particular in a number of labour-intensive 
sectors, led to a sharp decline in employment, most notably in construction and services. 
Although the government introduced a job 
retention 
scheme, 
financed 
by 
the 
Unemployment Insurance Fund, and a ban 
on lay-offs, which benefitted millions of 
people, employment (15 years and above) 
fell by close to 3 million or 10 % y/y in 
April 2020. It started to recover in the 
summer and increased further by June 
2021, with a notable rebound of industrial 
employment. However, employment levels 
and the employment rate remained below 
their height a few years ago. The pandemic increased the number of discouraged workers and 
the labour force participation rate fell to a low of 46.2 % in April 2020, before partially 
recovering to 51.2 % in the second quarter of 2021. Male and youth employment bore the 
brunt of the crisis, while female labour market participation and employment declined as well 
from already particularly low levels. The rate of youth not in employment, education or 
training increased further. Undeclared work declined as the pandemic affected relatively more 
sectors with higher informality. The unemployment rate was broadly stable at around 13 % on 
average in 2020 but declined by mid-2021. The slack on the labour market, however, was 
evident by the rise in the composite indicator of labour underutilisation, which takes into 
account time-related underemployment and potential labour force. While traditionally under 
20 %, it went up to close to 30 % of the labour force in the spring of 2020 and was still 
elevated in the second quarter of 2021. The job-retention measures that had shielded the 
labour market in the crisis were lifted in June. Regional labour market disparities are 
significant, with the unemployment rate ranging from 8.0 % to 33.5 % in 2020. After nearly 
two decades of continuous decline, poverty increased sharply in recent years because of the 
deteriorating labour market situation. The proportion of people with per capita consumption 
of below $5.5 a day (2011 PPP) went up from 8.5 % in 2018 to an estimated 12.2 % in 2020. 
Income inequality worsened as well with the Gini coefficient rising to 0.41 in 2020 – its 
highest level in a decade. 
40
45
50
55
60
65
0
10
20
30
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Graph 4: Turkey - Labour market trends
(15-64 age group)
Unemployment rate (lhs)
Participation rate (rhs)
Employment rate (rhs)
Source: Eurostat


===== PAGE 63 =====
 
61 
 
2.3.2. The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the 
Union 
Turkey has made limited progress and has a good level of preparation in achieving the 
capacity to cope with the competitive pressure and market forces within the EU. Despite 
some progress made in improving access to education, the mismatch between the 
education system and labour market needs persists. Expenditure on research and 
development continued increasing at a slow pace, but remained well below the 
government’s target. Supported by favourable financing conditions and concessional 
lending, investment activity rebounded in 2020. Progress was made with regard to the 
diversification of energy supplies and the development of the renewable energy sector. 
The extension of local content requirement practices continued to raise concerns. The 
relative share of the EU in Turkey’s foreign trade slightly increased, despite extensive 
deviations by Turkey from its obligations under the EU-Turkey Customs Union. 
The Commission’s recommendations from 2020 were not fully implemented and remain 
valid. In order to improve competitiveness and support long-term growth, Turkey should 
in particular: 
 continue increasing enrolment in education, improve vocational education and  
training and better adapt education and training to labour market needs; 
 take steps to open the gas market to competition; 
 remove all protectionist measures not in line with the EU-Turkey Customs Union. 
Education and innovation 
Turkey has made some progress in terms of improving access to education. Total 
expenditure on education was TRY 259.2 billion (6.0 % of GDP) in 2019, representing a real 
increase of 2.6 % year-on-year. Government spending was around three quarters of it or 4.4 % 
of GDP in 2019, increasing by 0.1pp from 2018. In the 2019-2020 school year, enrolment 
rates continued increasing for preschool, primary (first 4 years), lower secondary (second 4 
years), and in upper secondary education (final 4 years). However, the net enrolment rate 
remained particularly low in the age group 3-5 years and declined in the tertiary education, 
while dropout rates remained high in secondary education. (see Chapter 26). The proportion 
of students in vocational and technical secondary education fell further to 28.6 % (from 
37.2 % five years ago). The share of pupils in religious education remained broadly stable at 
close to 11 % in the upper secondary education, but increased in the lower secondary 
education to 13.6 %, up from 7.3 % five years ago. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Turkey 
has launched distance learning through state-run channels and internet platforms. Gender 
inequality in the educational system remains high. The scores obtained by Turkish students in 
the OECD 2018 PISA (Programme for International Student Assessment) test improved, but 
still remained below the OECD average. Despite some improvements, the unemployment rate 
among people with higher education was 12.8 % in 2020. There is a persistent mismatch 
between the requirements of the labour market and the skills acquired in the education system. 
However, as part of its Eleventh Development Plan, Turkey is increasing its efforts to align 
the education system with the requirements of the labour market, especially by further 
updating vocational and technical education, developing digital competencies and skills and 
supporting the participation of young people in the labour market. 
The private sector continues to lead research and development efforts. Research and 
development expenditure increased gradually from 0.8 % of GDP in 2013 to around 1.1 % in 


===== PAGE 64 =====
 
62 
 
2019, but still remained well below the government’s target of 1.8 % by 2023 and also below 
the EU average of 2.2 %. Almost two thirds of this investment came from the private sector. 
Cooperation between research institutions and the private sector still needs to be further 
strengthened. While the number of domestic patent applications increased by 0.9 % in 2020 as 
compared to 2019, Turkey’s total international patent applications decreased by 10.9 % in the 
same period.  
Physical capital and quality of infrastructure 
Supported by favourable financing conditions and concessional lending, investment 
activity rebounded in 2020. High investment, in particular in non-tradable sectors, 
contributed to the accumulation of macroeconomic imbalances that led to the abrupt 
depreciation of the lira in 2018. The ensuing correction was short-lived and, driven by 
significant monetary easing and government-subsidised lending, investment bounced back to 
27.4 % of GDP in 2020. The share of construction in total investment went down from 
a plateau of 56 % in 2013-2018 to 46 % in 2020. The share of investment in machinery and 
equipment followed the opposite pattern, rebounding strongly from 34 % in 2018 to 42 % in 
2020. Public investment had been broadly stable for years at close to 4 % of GDP. However, 
because of efforts to limit government expenditure and contain the budget deficit, it fell 
sharply to below 3 % in 2019-2020. The government has further advanced preparatory works 
for the Istanbul Canal project, connecting the Black Sea to the Sea of Marmara, despite strong 
domestic opposition, environmental and social concerns, and unclear financing and economic 
returns. 
Despite improved diversification of energy supplies, issues remain with competition and 
pricing mechanisms in the energy sector. The dominant market position of the vertically 
integrated National Petroleum Corporation BOTAŞ remained unchanged. This affects the 
viability of the recently established Energy Exchange Istanbul (EXIST), where a market of 
derivatives is expected to be launched in 2021. This should provide more depth and liquidity 
to the energy market. The update to the natural gas market law is long overdue. Good 
progress was made in the diversification of energy supplies, thanks to the now operational 
Trans-Anatolian Pipeline (TANAP) transmitting gas to the European section of the Southern 
Gas Corridor (SGC) and the significantly increased liquefied natural gas imports in 2020. The 
renewable energy sector of Turkey continued to grow with the support of a generous feed-in-
tariff scheme. A new financial support scheme entered into force in June 2021 (after the 
previous one expired) and facilities commissioned until December 2025 will benefit from it 
for the next 10 years that follow. It offers overall lower support than before and is 
denominated in Turkish lira. The state made a commitment to update the mechanism every 
quarter in order to adjust it for inflation and exchange rate fluctuations. The new scheme 
continues the financial incentives for the use of domestic equipment (55 % at the minimum) 
in renewable energy installations. The extension of the Local Content Requirement (LCR) 
practices in Turkey continues to raise concerns. These practices contradict WTO and the EU-
Turkey Customs Union rules and affect the EU and other international companies’ 
competitiveness on the Turkish energy market. 
Connectivity increased further but remained well below OECD average. The government 
considers accelerating the digital transformation a key priority to boost productivity and 
competitiveness of the economy. The number of broadband internet subscribers reached 82.4 
million in 2020, up from 76.6 million in 2019. Mobile broadband penetration slightly 
increased, though it is still below the OECD average. The share of households with access to 
internet at home grew from 88.3 % in 2019 to 90.7 % in 2020. Over the same period, internet 
usage by individuals aged 16-74 also increased from 75.3 % to 79.0 %. The share of 
individuals using e-government services reached 51.5 % in 2020. The number of 4.5G 


===== PAGE 65 =====
 
63 
 
subscribers increased to 77.3 million in the first quarter of 2021, of which 53.8 million were 
active users. 
Sectoral and enterprise structure 
The services sector continued to dominate the economy, but has been strongly impacted 
by the COVID-19 pandemic. Its share in total value added decreased from 57.2 % to 54.9 % 
between 2019 and 2020, mainly as contact-intensive sectors, such as hospitality and travel, 
were hard hit by the pandemic-related restrictions. Some sectors, like financial and insurance 
activities, and information and communication, however, performed very well, increasing also 
their economic weight. The construction sector, which had been one of the main sectors 
driving economic growth before 2018, saw its share falling from 8.5 % in 2017 to 5.2 % in 
2020 – a level not seen in 15 years. Employment in the construction sector decreased from 
7.5 % in 2017 to 5.6 % of total employment in 2019 and remained largely unchanged in 2020. 
Industry accounted for 20.6 % of employment in 2020, up by 0.7pps from its 2019 level. In 
spite of the pandemic, it managed to increase its share of GDP from 21.1 % to 22.1 % 
between 2019 and 2020. Although representing only 6.7 % of GDP in 2020, agriculture 
continues to be an important sector, employing 17.7 % of the workforce (down by 0.4pps 
from its 2019 level). 
Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are the backbone of the economy. SMEs 
employ around three quarters of Turkey’s workforce and generate more than half of the 
economy’s total value added. Turkey continued to implement various economic support 
schemes, mostly targeting SMEs. In order to limit the negative effects of the COVID-19 
pandemic, Turkey adopted support mechanisms for enterprises consisting of labour-related 
schemes (partial redundancy, short-time work, wage subsidy) and payment deferral measures 
(taxes, social security premiums, utility bills), while also providing financial support through 
loan guarantees, direct lending and subsidies. The SME support administration KOSGEB 
extended the scope of its TechnoInvest support programme to new products such as personal 
protective equipment and disinfectants and granted additional grace periods for eligible 
companies. Further assistance was provided in support of SMEs’ digitalisation and 
internationalisation. There were also limited direct cash transfers to restaurants and cafes in 
order to compensate their turnover loss due to repeated lockdowns. 
Economic integration with the EU and price competitiveness  
Despite a notable Brexit effect, economic integration with the EU remained high. In 
2020, Turkey remained the EU’s sixth largest trading partner, while the EU remains by far 
Turkey’s largest trading partner. The share of the EU in Turkish exports decreased from 
42.4 % in 2019 to 41.3 % in 2020 while the share of Turkish imports coming from the EU-27 
slightly increased from 32.3 % to 33.4 % between 2019 and 2020. Trade with the United 
Kingdom represented 6.6 % of total exports and 2.5 % of imports in 2020. The EU remained 
the largest source of foreign direct investment (FDI) in Turkey. The EU’s share in the overall 
stock of FDI declined from 72 % in 2013 to 62 % in 2020 (58 % in 2019). Trade openness 
declined slightly in 2020, as the pandemic led to a contraction of exports of services. The fall 
in the lira’s value intensified in 2020, leading to a significant further depreciation of the real 
effective exchange rate, which reached its lowest level on record since 1994. Turkey 
maintained the additional duties, of which the scope significantly increased during the 
COVID-19 pandemic, on a large number of products of non-EU origin and in free circulation 
within the EU-Turkey Customs Union. The forced localisation policy in the pharmaceutical 
sector, which the EU has challenged at the World Trade Organisation, remained in place, 
while non-tariff barriers such as import surveillance and customs checks, which were 
intensified during the pandemic, continued to hinder trade flows. 


===== PAGE 66 =====
 
64 
 
 
2.4. PUBLIC PROCUREMENT, STATISTICS, FINANCIAL CONTROL 
Chapter 5: Public procurement 
EU rules ensure that the public procurement of goods and services in any Member State is 
transparent and open to all EU companies on the basis of non-discrimination and equal 
treatment. 
Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of public procurement, made no progress over 
the reporting year and large gaps remained in its alignment with the EU acquis. Turkey 
maintained offsets and discriminatory local content favouring practices. There was no 
implementation of the 2020 report's recommendations. 
In addition to addressing the shortcomings set out below, Turkey should in particular: 
 revise its public procurement legislation to further align it with the 2014 EU Directives on 
public procurement including utilities, concessions and public private partnerships and to 
increase transparency; 
 repeal exemptions contradictory to the EU acquis and eliminate the discriminatory 
domestic price advantage and offset practices; 
 establish a fully independent complaint review mechanism, separate from the legislative 
and regulatory responsibilities of the public procurement authority. 
Institutional set-up and legal alignment 
Concerning the legal framework, Turkey’s national public procurement legislation broadly 
reflects the principles of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. However, 
compulsory domestic price advantages and offsets (such as the Industry Cooperation 
Programme which has similar effects with the offset practices), that allow authorities to 
demand compensating measures if goods are not produced domestically, are discriminatory 
and thus contradict the EU acquis. Turkey removed the lower limit for application of such 
offset practice. 
The Public Procurement Law (PPL) is partly aligned with the 2004 EU Public Procurement 
Directives. However, many sector-specific laws limit transparency and the coverage of public 
procurement rules is significantly reduced by a long and increasing list of exclusions of 
varying importance and scope. In June 2020, procurement by the State Supply Office of goods 
and services became obligatory for public institutions and organisations. The implementation 
of this mandatory centralised purchasing system practically increases the scope of exclusions 
since the procurements by the State Supply Office under the threshold of TRY 18.6 million 
(EUR 1.97 million) are exempted from the PPL. The threshold is also higher than the ones 
applicable for supplies and services in the EU. 
0
10
20
30
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Graph 5a: Turkey - Exports of goods
EU
CEFTA
Other
Source: WiiW
% of GDP
0
10
20
30
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Graph 5b: Turkey - Imports of goods
EU
CEFTA
Other
Source: WiiW
% of GDP


===== PAGE 67 =====
 
65 
 
Turkey still does not have a functioning single framework for coordinating, supervising and 
monitoring PPP operations.  
Turkey's 11th Development Plan (2019-2023) aims at increasing domestic production 
particularly for chemicals, pharmaceuticals and medical devices, electronics, machinery and 
electrical equipment, automotive and railway services sectors by means of using public 
procurement as a subsidising tool. For such purpose, a compulsory domestic price advantage 
of up to 15 % remains available for ‘medium and high-technology industrial products’ and the 
offset practices are promoted. The percentage of international tenders where domestic price 
advantage applied is high and has increased from 33 % in 2017 to 48 % in 2020, while the 
overall value of such tenders increased from 44 % to 47 % of the total during the same 
timeframe. Within tenders above the international procurement thresholds, domestic price 
advantage distorting competition against international tenderers was applied in 56 % of 
supply, 60 % of work, 20 % of consultancy and 71 % of service tenders, corresponding to 
53 %, 57 %, 24 % and 70 % of total value, respectively. 
The operational independence of the Public Procurement Board within the Public 
Procurement Authority (PPA) is potentially impaired, since the President of the Republic is 
authorised to directly appoint its president and members without any specific requirements on 
education and sector experience. 
Implementation and enforcement capacity 
The size of the public procurement market in Turkey narrowed from 7.5 % of GDP in 2017 to 
3.3 % in 2019. In 2020, the market accounted for 3.4 % of GDP reflecting the decrease in the 
financial resources allocated to the public services. In 2020, the number of PPP projects was 
three, down from eight in 2019. 
Monitoring of the contract awards and implementation is satisfactory. The PPA issues 
statistics on a six-month basis, which provide the source for measuring performance and 
making improvements to the public procurement system. PPA should transparently continue 
reporting the number of international tenders (regardless of international procurement 
thresholds) where domestic price advantage is applied. 
Contracting authorities’ capacity to manage public procurement processes continued to 
improve. Within the framework of COVID-19 administrative package, the PPA instructed the 
procurement authorities to use electronic procurement for the new and cancelled tenders. As 
a result, during the COVID-19 pandemic period in 2020, electronic procurement 
implementation, which was put into practice in the last quarter of 2016, became an important 
tool and reached 17 359 (4,551 in 2019) procurements corresponding to TRY 38.3 billion 
(TRY 4.1 billion in 2019). 
Mechanisms to identify and address corrupt and fraudulent practices are in place, including 
rules on integrity and conflict of interest. However, the use of the negotiated procedure, 
which corresponds to more than one fourth of all tenders (both in value and number), 
significantly increased in the last four years. When using this procedure, a specific sub-article 
(“Article 21/b” of the PPL) allows the contracting authorities to limit competition and 
transparency. In 2020, Article 21/b was used in 90 % of the tenders (in value) where the 
negotiated procedure applied. Such a widespread use led to allegations of political influence 
on public tenders. Turkey needs to develop instruments to evaluate contract performance 
including the economic, effectiveness, and efficiency of public procurement proceedings. 
Turkey should also develop a risk indicator system that signals potential integrity problems in 
the procurement process. 


===== PAGE 68 =====
 
66 
 
Efficient remedy system 
The right to legal remedy is secured in the Constitution and the PPL lays down the 
institutional set up and mechanism for handling complaints. The review and remedies system 
provides for effective, swift and competent handling and resolution of complaints and 
sanctions. However, further alignment of the legislation with the EU Remedies Directive is 
needed. For such purpose, Turkey needs to establish a fully independent procurement review 
board, separate from the public procurement authority and ensuring the independence of 
board members. 
The implementation capacity of the Public Procurement Board remains stable with 334 staff. 
The Public Procurement Board received 2 316 complaints in 2020 (3.53 % of contracts which 
allow for complaints), compared with 1 864 complaints in 2019, at the time amounting to 
2.87 % of the contracts. The appointment policy and the Board’s position as part of the PPA 
remained a concern. A fully independent Public Procurement Board would prevent possible 
conflicts of interest and ensure transparency. 
Chapter 18: Statistics 
EU rules require that Member States are able to produce good quality statistics in line with 
the principles of the European statistics Code of Practice and based on professional 
independence, impartiality, reliability, transparency, and confidentiality. Common rules are 
provided for the methodology, production and dissemination of statistical information. 
Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of statistics. Turkey made some progress in 
further aligning with the EU acquis and in improving the compliance level with respect to 
annual national accounts and the Excessive Deficit Procedure. Frequent changes of the 
president of the Turkish Statistical Institute (TurkStat) and other management positions 
significantly undermine the institution’s credibility. There was limited implementation of last 
year’s recommendations. 
In addition to addressing the shortcomings set out below, in the coming year Turkey should 
in particular: 
 further align national accounts and financial accounts with the European System of 
Accounts 2010 (ESA 2010); 
 broaden and further reinforce coordination between TurkStat and other data providers; 
 improve statistics on agriculture, migration and asylum. 
As regards statistical infrastructure, Turkey’s statistics legislation is based on the European 
Statistics Code of Practice. TurkStat is associated to the Ministry of Treasury and Finance. 
There were increasing concerns regarding the transparency of the appointment and dismissal 
procedures within TurkStat, including in the post of its president, undermining significantly 
the institution’s credibility. Efforts continued to improve the use of public institutions' 
administrative records and their integration into statistical production but the cooperation 
between TurkStat and other data providers should be developed further. Registers in the 
statistical office are updated regularly. The main classifications are aligned with the EU 
acquis. 
For macroeconomic statistics, efforts continued to integrate administrative records into the 
national accounting system. Turkey improved annual national accounts by providing 
population data. However, employment data according to ESA 2010 was not provided. The 
GNI inventory submitted to Eurostat in 2017 still needs to be further aligned with Eurostat’s 
GNI Inventory Guide and the GNI calculations need to be brought fully in line with ESA 


===== PAGE 69 =====
 
67 
 
2010. TurkStat did not transmit the annual institutional sector accounts for 2019. Turkey 
made progress on the coverage and timeliness of the quarterly national accounts, however, 
quarterly sector accounts were not available. Turkey produces highly compliant statistics on 
international trade in goods. It improved quality and coverage of excessive deficit procedure 
tables. Turkey also made some progress in the implementation of Eurostat’s methodology 
guidance, the provision of extensive explanatory notes on the data as well as the delimitation 
of the general government sector. It transmitted data on government revenue expenditure and 
detailed taxes based on ESA 2010 for 2009-2019. Further efforts are still required on fiscal 
reporting and notifications under the excessive deficit procedure. Turkey continued reporting 
quarterly balance of payments and international investment position data on a regular basis. 
Business statistics improved with the use of administrative records for indicators. Short-term 
statistics are largely aligned. Research and development statistics are fully compliant. The 
annual surveys on information and communication technology are largely compliant with EU 
standards. Rail, maritime and regional transport statistics are highly compliant, but further 
progress is still needed on road freight data. Tourism statistics are available, but need to be 
further aligned with the EU acquis. Foreign affiliate statistics have not been transmitted yet 
to Eurostat. 
As for social statistics, the survey on income and living conditions is carried out in 
compliance with EU standards and data are sent to Eurostat. Social protection statistics are 
highly compliant with EU standards and labour market statistics are fully aligned. TurkStat 
made some revisions in its labour force statistics in accordance with the new acquis. Data for 
the labour cost index is regularly provided, although incomplete. The Structure of Earnings 
Survey is conducted every four years in compliance with the EU legislation. TurkStat did not 
provide quarterly job vacancy survey. Statistics on education and vocational training are 
available. Public health statistics are available, while further progress is needed for data on 
health expenditure and non-monetary healthcare. Crime statistics are produced, but efforts 
are needed on criminal justice statistics. Statistics on immigration and emigration are 
produced. Asylum statistics are not yet collected according to the EU requirement. 
As regards agricultural statistics, no agricultural census has been carried out since 2001. 
Statistics for crop and for most of the critical animal production, milk and dairy are available. 
Supply balance sheets are also available for almost all basic crop products and for wine. The 
economic accounts for agriculture are not fully compliant with the EU acquis. The results of 
the 2016 farm structure survey have still not been transmitted to the Eurofarm system. 
Energy statistics are highly compliant with the EU requirements. Energy prices are sent 
regularly to Eurostat in good quality. As for environmental statistics, waste and water 
statistics are produced, but further process is needed on water resources and water abstraction 
statistics. Environmental accounts on greenhouse gas emissions and statistics on 
environmental taxes, material flow and environmental protection expenditure are available. 
Significant efforts were made to improve the compilation of the monetary environmental 
accounts modules. 
Chapter 32: Financial control 
The EU promotes the reform of national governance systems to improve managerial 
accountability, sound financial management of income and expenditure, and external audit of 
public funds. The financial control rules further protect the EU’s financial interests against 
fraud in the management of EU funds and the euro against counterfeiting. 
Turkey has a good level of preparation on financial control. Limited progress was made in 
the reporting period, while last year’s recommendations were not addressed. Audit reports of 


===== PAGE 70 =====
 
68 
 
the Turkey Wealth Fund (TWF) were published on its website, and some companies of the 
Fund are directly audited by the Turkish Court of Accounts (TCA). However, the TWF 
remained not fully subject to the direct audit by the TCA. The anti-fraud coordination service 
(AFCOS) network has yet to be re-established. The purpose, authority and responsibility of 
internal audit is undermined by the absence of a legal requirement to have internal audit units 
in Ministries. Last year’s recommendations remain valid. 
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular: 
 update the Public Internal Financial Control policy paper and its action plan and ensure 
that a formal coordination, monitoring and reporting framework is put in place for the 
updated action plan; 
 re-establish the AFCOS network and adopt a national anti-fraud strategy; 
 reconsider the arrangements that would include municipalities and state-owned enterprises 
in the treasury single account. 
Public internal financial control (PIFC) 
The strategic framework is partially in place. The update of the Public Internal Financial 
Control policy paper has not made progress since 2012. Turkey still lacks a comprehensive 
strategic framework for public administration reform and for public finance management. 
Public finance management related goals are found in different planning documents and 
strategies by various institutions, and there is no mechanism in place to coordinate 
implementation of reforms and to ensure regular monitoring and reporting. Exceptional 
management and control procedures or derogations applied by the authorities during the 
COVID-19 crisis need to be well documented, accompanied by adequate safeguards and 
considered for special audits. 
The Turkish administration has a uniform management structure that combines elements of 
managerial accountability and delegation with a results-oriented performance management 
system. Further efforts are needed to address harmonisation of legislation, managerial 
accountability, including reporting structures, delegation of decision-making responsibilities, 
and functioning of internal control. The Public Financial Management and Control (PFMC) 
Law applies to all public institutions and defines the elements of financial control. It sets out 
the relevant responsibilities of the heads of public institutions, including managerial duties 
and the delegation of authority to authorising officers, with the Ministry of Finance and 
Treasury assigned a coordinating role. 
The PFMC Law regulates internal control, which functions largely in line with international 
standards. Full implementation of internal control systems continues to be negatively 
impacted by capacity and ownership issues. The application of risk management is still at an 
early stage, and monitoring and reporting of irregularities are yet to be further developed. 
Turkey has a treasury single account, but the inclusion of local administrations and state-
owned enterprises within its scope raises concerns. 
Internal audit practice is regulated in line with international standards in the PFMC Law. 
An internal audit manual and a code of ethics are in place, as are manuals prepared by the 
Central Harmonisation Unit, but they have not been updated since 2013. There is no legal 
requirement for Ministries to have an internal audit unit, just internal auditors, and there is no 
formal status for heads of internal audit as a Unit Head. There is no entity performing the role 
of an Audit Committee and auditors report directly to their Deputy Ministers or a senior 
manager. These reporting arrangements could compromise auditors’ independence in 
planning and performing their work. There is generally a lack of data on internal audit 


===== PAGE 71 =====
 
69 
 
planning and implementation of recommendations. There is no systematic follow-up of the 
implementation of internal audit recommendations. The existing lack of clarity in the 
legislation and in the practice between the internal audit and inspection organisations do 
compromise the effectiveness of the internal audit function. 
Two Central Harmonisation Units (CHUs) are tasked with setting standards, monitoring 
and reporting on PIFC implementation. The CHU for financial management and control 
defines standards and methodology, provides guidance, training and overall coordination to 
public administrations in this field, and does not perform internal control quality reviews. The 
Internal Audit Coordination Board is the CHU for internal audit, which notably monitors the 
internal audit systems of the public administrations, develops internal audit standards and 
publishes manuals. The Internal Audit Coordination Board consists of seven members 
appointed by the President for a period of four years and is now fully attached to the Ministry 
of Finance and Treasury. Efforts should be made to ensure its independence and to strenghten 
its capacity, organisational structure and adequate resources to fulfill its mandate.  
External audit 
The constitutional and legal framework provides for the independence of the Turkish Court 
of Accounts (TCA). The TCA law is in line with International Organisation of Supreme Audit 
Institutions (INTOSAI) standards. It provides for an almost exhaustive audit mandate and 
gives the TCA full discretion in discharging its responsibilities. Concerns exist around fiscal 
discipline, transparency and accountability in relation to the Turkey Wealth Fund (TWF), 
chaired by the President of the Republic and not fully subject to the direct audit by the TCA. 
Some companies in the TWF portfolio are audited by the TCA and some TWF activities are 
not subject to external audit. The TWF is audited by an independent audit firm and by 
auditors appointed by the President. Audit reports of the TWF are submitted to the Plan and 
Budget Committee of the Parliament and published on the TWF website. There are no notes 
accompanying the financial statements, which may raise concerns in terms of full 
transparency.  
The TCA has both audit and judicial functions. In 2020, it had 1,874 staff, including 830 
auditors in comparison to 1,861 staff in 2019, of which 804 were auditors. The TCA is 
implementing its 2019-2023 Strategic Plan which notably foresees the development of risk-
based audit and strengthening its human resources capacity. The TCA published 
a Communication Strategy on the Plan in 2020. 
The TCA has improved the quality of audit work and now carries out “value for money” 
performance audits as per international standards (7 started in 2019 and 3 started in 2020). 
The TCA annually submits four audit reports to the Parliament (External Audit General 
Evaluation Report, Accountability General Evaluation Report, Financial Statistics Evaluation 
Report, and Report on State-owned Economic Enterprises) in addition to a statement of 
general conformity. The reports of the TCA are only considered by the Parliament during its 
deliberations on the budget. 
Regarding the impact of audit work, the TCA assesses the internal control environment of 
audited entities as part of its audit work, and thus contributes to PIFC development. The TCA 
reports on state-owned enterprises are analysed by the commission of state-owned enterprises 
of the Parliament, while other audit reports are analysed by the Parliament committee on 
planning and budget. The TCA reports are published online every year, with the exception of 
those on state-owned economic enterprises. TCA recommendations should be systematically 
and swiftly implemented by the audited institutions. A working group between the TCA and 
the Ministry of Treasury and Finance is operational. Increased parliamentary scrutiny on TCA 
audit findings and recommendations is still needed. There is a need for separating discussion 


===== PAGE 72 =====
 
70 
 
on budget and audit issues. The establishnent of a working group between the TCA and the 
Parliament solely dedicated to discuss performance of public institutions and their spending 
could be instrumental in this regard. 
Protection of the EU’s financial interests 
While Turkey has reached a good level of EU acquis alignment, it still needs to fully align its 
legislation with the EU Directive on the fight against fraud to the Union’s financial interests 
by means of criminal law. The State Supervisory Council (SSC) was designated as the anti-
fraud coordination service (AFCOS), but an AFCOS network, involving other relevant 
authorities, has to be re-established. Turkey also needs to adopt a national anti-fraud strategy. 
Turkey should significantly strengthen its cooperation with the European Commission 
during investigations, and continue to report irregularities and suspected fraud cases. Turkey 
reported 672 cases to the Commission via the online irregularity management system from 
2012 to 2020, of which 72 cases in 2020. Turkey needs to continue to develop a solid track 
record on cooperation on investigations and reporting of irregularities. 
Protection of the euro against counterfeiting 
Turkey has reached a high level of EU acquis alignment in this area. Technical analysis of 
counterfeit money, including euro banknotes and coins, is carried out by a dedicated 
department in the Central Bank and technical analysis of counterfeit coins including euro 
coins are performed by the Turkish State Mint. Credit institutions that do not withdraw 
counterfeits from circulation are subject to financial penalties. Turkey takes part in the actions 
of the Pericles 2020 programme. 
3. 
GOOD NEIGHBOURLY RELATIONS AND REGIONAL COOPERATION  
Cyprus 
Due to continued and new unauthorised Turkish hydrocarbon exploration activities in the 
maritime zones of Cyprus and Greece, tensions in the Eastern Mediterranean and Aegean Sea 
increased in the second half of 2020. In November 2020, the Council extended the existing 
framework for restrictive measures in response to Turkey’s unauthorised drilling activities in 
the Eastern Mediterranean. In its conclusions of December 2020, the European Council 
strongly condemned Turkey’s unilateral actions, provocations and escalated rhetoric against 
the EU, EU Member States and European leaders. 
The tensions in the Eastern Mediterranean decreased in the beginning of 2021. Among other 
steps taken, Turkey stopped illegal drilling activities in the maritime zones of Cyprus. The 
European Council of March 2021 stated that provided that this de-escalation is sustained and 
that Turkey engages constructively, and subject to the established conditionalities set out in 
previous European Council conclusions, in order to further strengthen the recent dynamic, the 
EU is ready to engage with Turkey in a phased, proportionate and reversible manner to 
enhance cooperation in a number of areas of common interest. The June 2021 European 
Council reiterated its full commitment to the comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus problem 
on the basis of a bicommunal, bizonal federation with political equality, in accordance with 
the relevant UN Security Council Resolutions. It underlined the importance of the status of 
Varosha and called for full respect of UN Security Council Resolutions, in particular 
Resolutions 550, 789 and 1251.  
Following the change in leadership of the Turkish Cypriot Community in December 2020, the 
United Nations senior official for Cyprus held a series of meetings with representatives of the 
two Cypriot communities. For the first time in almost four years, new informal talks took 


===== PAGE 73 =====
 
71 
 
place on the future of the island of Cyprus between the two Cypriot communities and the 
island’s three Guarantor Powers, the UK, Turkey and Greece in Geneva in April 2021. The 
informal meeting did not pave the way for the resumption of formal negotiations. The 
European Council of June 2021 regretted this development.  
Turkey continued to challenge the status of the fenced-off city of Varosha. Several 
representatives of the Turkish government, including the President and the Vice President 
visited Varosha, promising financial support to the development of the area. The December 
2020 European Council reiterated its October 2020 conclusions and condemned Turkey’s 
unilateral steps in Varosha and called for full respect of UN Security Council Resolutions 550 
and 789. On 27 July 2021, the High Representative strongly condemned on behalf of the EU 
Turkey’s unilateral steps and the unacceptable announcements made by the Turkish President 
and the leader of the Turkish Cypriot community on 20 July 2021 on the further reopening of 
the fenced-off town of Varosha. In addition the High Representative welcomed the Statement 
made by the President of the UN Security Council on behalf of the Council on 23 July 2021.  
As emphasised in the Negotiating Framework and Council declarations, Turkey is expected to 
actively support the negotiations on a fair, comprehensive and viable settlement of the Cyprus 
issue within the UN framework, in accordance with the relevant UN Security Council 
resolutions and in line with the principles on which the EU is founded and the EU acquis. It is 
important that Turkey reaffirms its commitment to and constructive engagement to the United 
Nations-led settlement talks on Cyprus in line with the relevant UN Security Council 
Resolutions, including in its external aspects. No unilateral actions should be taken that could 
raise tensions on the island and undermine a return to talks. Related to Varosha, Turkey must 
immediately reverse the unilateral actions announced on 20 July 2021 and all steps taken on 
Varosha since October 2020 that run contrary to relevant UN Security Council resolutions. 
Turkey continues to refuse to recognise the Republic of Cyprus. Despite repeated calls by the 
Council and the Commission, Turkey has still not complied with its obligations as outlined in 
the Declaration of the European Community and its Member States of 21 September 2005 
and in Council Conclusions, including those of December 2006 and December 2015. Turkey 
has not fulfilled its obligation to ensure full and non-discriminatory implementation of the 
Additional Protocol to the Association Agreement and has not removed all obstacles to the 
free movement of goods, including restrictions on direct transport links with the Republic of 
Cyprus. 
Turkey continued to veto applications by the Republic of Cyprus to join several international 
organisations, including the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD).  
Peaceful settlement of border disputes  
After December 2020, a more positive dynamic in the EU-Turkey relations was observed 
following the de-escalation in the Eastern Mediterranean through the discontinuation of illegal 
hydrocarbon exploration and drilling activities by Turkey in the maritime zones of Cyprus and 
Greece and the resumption of exploratory talks between Turkey and Greece in January 2021. 
These talks should remain a valuable channel of communication between both sides to find 
common ground for the start of negotiations on the delimitation of the continental shelf. The 
European Council of March 2021 welcomed these developments. In addition, the European 
Council reaffirmed that the EU would remain committed to defending its interests and those 
of its Member States as well as to upholding regional stability. The Greek Foreign Minister 
visited Ankara on 15 April and the Turkish Foreign Minister visited Athens on 30-31 May 


===== PAGE 74 =====
 
72 
 
where a mutual desire to promote a positive agenda was ascertained. The Greek Prime 
Minister and Turkish President met on 14 June.  
The possible extension of Greek territorial waters to 12 nautical miles in the Aegean Sea 
under Article 3 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea continued to weigh 
on Greece-Turkey relations, as the 1995 declaration of the Turkish Grand National Assembly 
that any unilateral action by Greece to extend its territorial waters would be considered casus 
belli still holds. 
Greece and Cyprus continue to complain about repeated violations and the militarisation of 
their territorial waters and airspace by Turkey. Flights over Greek inhabited areas continued 
to be reported, in violation of international law. Overflights of Greek mainland in the Evros 
river border region were also reported. As highlighted by the Council, and stemming from 
obligations under the Negotiating Framework, Turkey is expected to unequivocally commit to 
good neighbourly relations, international agreements and the peaceful settlement of disputes 
having recourse, if necessary, to the International Court of Justice. Turkey must avoid threats 
and actions that damage good neighbourly relations, normalise its relations with the Republic 
of Cyprus and respect the sovereignty of all EU Member States over their territorial sea and 
airspace as well as all their sovereign rights, including inter alia the right to explore and 
exploit natural resources, in accordance with EU and international law, in particular the 
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). Accordingly, Turkey is 
expected to refrain from any drilling activities of hydrocarbons in the maritime zones of other 
states. 
The bilateral Memorandum of Understanding on the delimitation of maritime jurisdiction 
areas between Turkey and the National Accord Government of Libya signed in November 
2019 remains in place despite the fact that it ignored the sovereign rights of Greece in the area 
concerned, infringes upon the sovereign rights of third States, does not comply with the 
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and cannot produce any legal consequences 
for third States.  
Regional cooperation 
Good neighbourly relations form an essential part of Turkey’s process of moving towards the 
EU. Bilateral relations with other enlargement countries were generally good, but remained 
challenging with neighbouring EU Member States, particularly Greece and Cyprus. Tensions 
in the Aegean Sea and Eastern Mediterranean were not conducive to good neighbourly 
relations and undermined regional stability and security. Turkey continued to conduct its 
proactive foreign and economic policy with the Western Balkans and supported the countries 
of the region in their respective efforts in joining NATO and the EU. Turkey also improved its 
relations in the fields of culture and security. Turkey assumed the Chairmanship-in-office of 
the South-East European Cooperation Process (SEECP) in June 2020 for one year. The 
Turkish authorities continued to exert pressure on authorities in the Western Balkans to 
locally prosecute and extradite alleged members of the Gülen movement. Turkey provided 
medical equipment and aid to all Western Balkans in their fight against the COVID-19 
pandemic. 
Turkey-Albania relations are strong. At a High-Level Strategic Cooperation Council in 
January 2021, both countries agreed to further upgrade bilateral cooperation in a number of 
areas. Turkey was the biggest foreign investor in Albania and a big donor of humanitarian 
and medical aid during the COVID-19 pandemic.  


===== PAGE 75 =====
 
73 
 
Turkey’s relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina remained positive. The tripartite Bosnia 
and Herzegovina Presidency paid an official visit to Turkey in March 2021. Turkey agreed to 
donate 30 000 coronavirus vaccines to Bosnia and Herzegovina.  
Turkey maintained strong cultural and economic ties with Kosovo. 
Turkey and Montenegro continued developing their bilateral cooperation in all fields. Turkey 
was actively engaged in the economic, educational and cultural sector of North Macedonia. 
Turkey continued to provide humanitarian and development assistance to the country.   
Turkey developed its overall relations with Serbia and further increased its investments there, 
with the biggest Turkish investment being the Serbian section of the Belgrade-Sarajevo 
highway. A high-level visit took place in October 2020.  
4. 
ABILITY TO ASSUME OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP 
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET  
This cluster covers: free movement of goods (Chapter 1), freedom of movement for workers 
(Chapter 2), right of establishment and freedom to provide services (Chapter 3), free 
movement of capital (Chapter 4), company law (Chapter 6), intellectual property law 
(Chapter 7), competition policy (Chapter 8), financial services (Chapter 9), and health and 
consumer protection (Chapter 28). This cluster is key to the good functioning of the EU-
Turkey Customs Union and to integrating Turkey in the EU’s single market. 
Turkey has achieved a good level of preparation for the free movement of goods. Although 
it continued to align with technical EU legislation under the ‘New and Global Approach’, 
technical barriers to trade remain, which hamper the good functioning of the Customs Union. 
Preparations in the areas of freedom of movement for workers and right of establishment and 
freedom to provide services are at an early stage as many professions are closed to EU 
nationals.  
Turkey is moderately prepared on free movement of capital notably because of the 
substantial remaining obstacles for acquisitions of assets and real estate. It improved its legal 
framework regulating the fight against money laundering and terrorism financing, but needs 
to ensure that implementation does not restrict the legitimate rights of NGOs. There is a good 
level of preparation in terms of legislative alignment of consumer and health protection, as 
exemplified by Turkey’s strong vaccination campaign against COVID-19. However, in both 
areas, there is a need to strengthen administrative capacity, consultations and coordination 
among stakeholders. Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of competition policy.  
There is a continued lack of State aid implementation rules, enforcement and transparency, 
while the institutional set up remains incomplete. 
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods  
The free movement of goods ensures that many products can be traded freely across the EU 
based on common rules and procedures. Where products are governed by national rules, the 
principle of the free movement of goods prevents these from creating unjustified barriers to 
trade. 
Turkey has achieved a good level of preparation for the free movement of goods. It made 
no progress in addressing last year’s recommendations. While alignment with technical EU 
                                                          
 This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244/1999 and the ICJ 
Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence. 


===== PAGE 76 =====
 
74 
 
legislation under the ‘New and Global Approach’ continued, technical barriers to trade 
remained in place, preventing the free movement of some goods. Requirements 
discriminating against EU products remained, violating Turkey’s obligations under the 
Customs Union. Turkey increased its product safety controls under the risk-based import 
control system, leading to unjustified checks and causing delays in EU products’ access to 
the Turkish market. 
In the coming period, Turkey should in particular: 
 eliminate non-tariff barriers to the free movement of goods that are in breach of Customs 
Union obligations, such as surveillance regimes for the import of certain products, export 
restrictions, prior registration requirements, conformity assessments and inspections, 
licensing surveillance and other documentation requirements for imports and non-
acceptance of EU good manufacturing practices certificates; 
 reconsider schemes imposing local content requirements or relocation of production 
particularly in the area of medicines for human use; 
 increase the coverage and effectiveness of market surveillance measures. 
General principles 
The framework for the free movement of goods is largely in place in Turkey. However, 
issues related to implementation still remain. A range of non-tariff barriers to the free 
movement of goods that are in breach of Customs Union obligations are still in place and 
some were introduced in the reporting period. These included surveillance regimes for the 
import of certain products, export restrictions, prior registration requirements, conformity 
assessments and inspections under the risk-based import control system, licensing 
surveillance and other documentation requirements, as well as non-acceptance of EU good 
manufacturing practices certificates and discrimination against EU products. Furthermore, 
schemes to ensure the local manufacture or local content requirements create de facto market 
access barriers for EU products and are considered not in line with the Customs Union. The 
prior authorisation requirement for exports of some personal protective equipment (PPE) 
introduced in March 2020 is still in place. 
Non-harmonised area 
Turkey adopted a new regulation on mutual recognition in the non-harmonised area in March 
2021 in line with the EU acquis. The number of notifications of product legislation from 
Turkey increased from 7 in 2020 to 13 in 2021. Considering Turkey’s economic size, 
legislative activity and link with the European Union under the Customs Union, this is 
insufficient. 
Harmonised area: quality infrastructure 
Turkey is aligned with the EU acquis on technical regulations, standards, conformity 
assessment, accreditation, metrology, and market surveillance. Implementing regulations 
were published on general product safety, the Conformité Européenne mark (CE mark), 
conformity assessment bodies, notified bodies and conformity assessment methods.  
The Turkish Standards Institute is independent and able to implement European and 
international standards. It has adequate staff resources and financing, and since 2012 is a full 
member of the European Committee for Standardisation (CEN) and the European Committee 
for Electrotechnical Standardisation (CENELEC). By April 2021, it had adopted 21 372 
national standards aligned with European standards. The rate of harmonisation with CEN and 
CENELEC standards is 99 % and 96 %, respectively. Eight Turkish economic operators are 


===== PAGE 77 =====
 
75 
 
full members of the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) and one is an 
observer.  
Turkey had 51 notified bodies, two technical approval bodies and three recognised third-
party organisations in place as of June 2021. The Turkish Accreditation Agency (TÜRKAK) 
is a signatory of nine multilateral agreements as part of the European cooperation for 
Accreditation association. TÜRKAK was admitted to the mutual recognition of data 
agreement (MAD) of the OECD Good Laboratory Practices Working Group (OECD-GLP) in 
February 2020. The National Metrology Institute (TÜBITAK-UME) is a member of the 
European Association of National Metrology Institutes (EURAMET) and participates in the 
Committee of the European Metrology Programme for Innovation and Research (EMPIR). 
The Ministry of Industry and Technology participates in the European Legal Metrology 
Organisation (WELMEC).  
Turkey performs market surveillance in line with the EU acquis and submits its annual 
programme to the European Commission. According to initial data from the Ministry of 
Trade, the overall budget allocated to market surveillance decreased by 20 % in 2020. There 
was a decrease of 32 % in the number of products subject to market surveillance checks in 
2020 as compared to 2019. Market surveillance is not performed on the basis of risk 
assessment. Surveillance remained very limited with regard to e-commerce while the volume 
of online shopping increased. About 26 % of unsafe products were subject to fines in 2019 as 
compared to 31 % in 2018. This decline raises concerns about the enforcement of product 
safety legislation.  
Harmonised area: sectoral legislation 
On the ‘new and global approach’ product legislation, legislation aligned to the EU acquis 
was adopted on radio equipment, medical devices and in vitro diagnostic medical devices. 
Implementing legislation was issued on lifts and equipment and protective systems intended 
for use in potentially explosive atmospheres. Turkey adopted implementing legislation on 
energy labelling and eco-design requirements for various product groups. 
On ‘old approach’ product legislation, Turkey adopted legislation to align with EU acquis 
on emission limits of internal combustion engines for non-road mobile machinery and 
labelling of tyres with respect to fuel efficiency. Concerns exist with regard to the 
implementation of EU acquis on cosmetics in terms of registration requirements and 
notifications on the product tracking system. Amending legislation on agricultural and 
forestry tractors was adopted in April 2021 postponing enforcement deadlines to 1 January 
2023. Turkey amended the legal base on the licensing of medicinal products for human use, 
allowing the approval of emergency use of vaccines. Turkey did not accept EU good 
manufacturing practice (GMP) certificates on medicines for human use, in contradiction to 
Customs Union rules. Turkey’s schemes impose the requirement of local manufacturing on 
medicines for human use and on agricultural and forestry tractors, which create market access 
barriers for EU products. Turkey is only partly aligned with the European Regulation on 
Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH). Turkey’s 
product safety controls on imported goods processed through the electronic TAREKS system 
require additional documentation and information for products coming from the EU, contrary 
to Customs Union provisions. In 2021, textiles and footwear were also covered by this 
requirement.  
On procedural measures, there is a specific licensing and regulation system for economic 
operators dealing with drug precursors, with a strict follow-up and monitoring system in 
cooperation with the police and customs authorities. Turkey is aligned with the EU acquis 
regarding licensing procedures for firearms. There was no progress on alignment with the 


===== PAGE 78 =====
 
76 
 
EU acquis on cultural goods. 
Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers  
Citizens of one Member State have the right to work in another Member State and must be 
given the same working and social conditions as other workers. 
Preparations in the area of freedom of movement for workers are at an early stage and there 
was no progress during the reporting period. 
There was no progress on access to the labour market or coordination of social security 
systems. So far, Turkey has concluded 15 bilateral social security agreements with EU 
Member States, but no new bilateral social security agreements were signed during the 
reporting period. There were no developments on future participation in the European 
employment services network (EURES). 
Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services  
EU natural and legal persons have the right to establish themselves in any Member State and 
to provide cross-border services. For certain regulated professions, there are rules on 
mutual recognition of qualifications. Postal services are gradually being opened up to 
competition. 
Preparations in the area of right of establishment and freedom to provide services are at an 
early stage. There was no progress in the reporting period. Substantial efforts are still 
required to align with the EU acquis. There was no implementation of the 2020 Report's 
recommendations which remain valid.  
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular: 
 align with the Services Directive on the provision of cross-border services and set up a 
Point of Single Contact; 
 align with EU acquis in the area of postal services; 
 align its national legislation with the EU acquis in the area of the mutual recognition of 
professional qualifications.  
There was no progress on the right of establishment where many requirements continue to 
restrict this right.  
Regarding the freedom to provide cross-border services, registration, licensing and 
authorisation requirements are still in place for service providers registered in the EU. The 
Point of Single Contact has not been set up yet. Preparations are still ongoing to transform 
the retail sector information system (PERBIS) into a sector-specific Point of Single Contact. 
No progress was made in the area of postal services. Regarding the provision of universal 
postal service, Turkey is yet to align with the Postal Services Directive. A reserved area in 
the standard postal letter service sector and exclusive rights of the universal service provider 
are still maintained. National legislation is also still to be aligned with the provisions of the 
Regulation on cross-border parcel delivery services. 
On the mutual recognition of professional qualifications, some regulated professions still 
require reciprocal recognition. Nationality and language requirements have not been 
removed. Alignment of national legislation with the EU acquis in this area needs to continue. 


===== PAGE 79 =====
 
77 
 
Chapter 4 - Free movement of capital  
In the EU, capital and investments must be able to move without restriction and there are 
common rules for cross-border payments. Banks and other economic operators apply certain 
rules to support the fight against money laundering and terrorist financing.  
Turkey is moderately prepared on free movement of capital. Overall, there was some 
progress in this area in the reporting period. Legislation on real estate acquisition is not 
aligned with the EU acquis. Restrictions imposed on capital outflows and foreign exchange-
denominated transactions after the August 2018 currency crisis are still in force. In the light 
of the recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), Turkey moderately 
improved its legal framework regulating the fight against money laundering and terrorism 
financing. There was limited progress in the implementation of last year’s 
recommendations.  
In addition to addressing the shortcomings set out below, Turkey should in particular: 
 draft and adopt an action plan on real estate acquisition by foreigners to lift restrictions 
and increase transparency; 
 further align with the EU acquis by strengthening measures to prevent the misuse of its 
financial system for the purpose of money laundering and the financing of terrorism; 
 ensure full compliance with the outstanding FATF recommendations in the fight against 
terrorist financing and money laundering, and in line with the recommendations of the 
Venice Commission regarding the law on the prevention of financing of the 
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. 
On capital movements and payments, Turkey’s legislation on real estate acquisition by 
foreigners remains opaque and does not apply to all EU nationals in a non-discriminatory 
way. Immovable property acquisition by citizens of neighbouring countries in border 
provinces is restricted. An action plan to further liberalise the purchase of real estate by 
foreigners needs to be adopted and implemented, bringing Turkey’s laws in line with the EU 
acquis. Restrictions applying to foreign ownership remain in place in many sectors such as 
radio and TV broadcasting, aviation and maritime transportation, mining and electricity 
market. The restrictions introduced after the August 2018 currency crisis on capital 
movements for residents and non-banking corporations, in particular for transactions 
denominated in foreign currencies, are still in place. The obligation of transferring back the 
proceeds derived from export transactions into the country is still in force. The Banking and 
Supervision Agency (BRSA) eased the restrictions previously introduced in April 2020 
regarding domestic banks’ ability to do swap operations and other derivatives operations with 
foreign counterparties. It exempted first international development banks and then non-
resident banks from several of the restrictions imposed on access to Turkish lira liquidity 
under some conditions. It relaxed the limit for banks’ foreign-exchange swap, forward and 
option transactions with foreign entities and increased the amount of lira swap and derivative 
products sold by banks to non-residents. 
Turkey has reached a good standard in payment systems. The Association of Payment and 
Electronic Money Institutions of Turkey (TÖDEB) was established as a public occupational 
organisation in June 2020. It is mandatory for a payment and electronic money institution to 
become member of this association. The Central Bank has introduced a new retail payment 
system in January 2021. The Instant and Continuous Transfer of Funds (FAST) system 
allows fund holders to transfer instantly money between their accounts at different banks on a 
24/7 basis. At this stage, only banks operating in Turkey can participate in the system. The 


===== PAGE 80 =====
 
78 
 
FAST system was launched with a transaction upper limit of TRY 50 and then raised to TRY 
1 000. The Central Bank banned in April 2021 the use of crypto currency and crypto assets 
directly or indirectly as an instrument of payment. 
Turkey made limited progress in the fight against money laundering and financing of 
terrorism. The Financial Crimes Investigation Board (MASAK), the Turkish Financial 
Intelligence Unit, developed a sound track-record during the reporting period. The number of 
suspicious transaction reports submitted to the MASAK reached 237 531 and the number of 
files analysed by MASAK was 10 298 in 2020. There were 53 convictions for money 
laundering in 2018, which increased to 95 convictions in 2019 and 92 convictions in 2020. 
In December 2020, the Parliament adopted the law on preventing financing of proliferation of 
weapons of mass destruction. Its declared objectives are to ensure compliance of Turkish 
legislation and procedures with relevant UN Security Council Resolutions. The law also aims 
at strengthening national capacity in fighting money laundering and financing of terrorism 
and complying with the FATF recommendations in terms of increasing effectiveness and 
dissuasiveness of the Turkish legal framework on terrorist financing and proliferation. 
Furthermore, the law reformed the legal framework to prevent the abuse of non-profit 
organisations for the financing of terrorism. Given the importance of the law and clear 
indications that some of its aspects threaten the very existence of NGOs, it is important that 
any measures taken to counter terrorism are in line with Turkey’s obligations under 
international law, and in particular international human rights law. Turkey needs to continue 
addressing outstanding recommendations to avoid FATF listing in line with the first 
enhanced follow-up report by the FATF. Failure to address these recommendations puts 
Turkey at risk of being included in the EU list of high-risk third countries presenting strategic 
deficiencies in their anti-money laundering/countering financing of terrorism regimes. 
The government, for the first time since the adoption of the terrorism financing law of 2013, 
used the domestic asset freezing instrument against 377 people and organisations in April 
2021. Legal provisions are sufficient to conclude that the United Nations Security Council 
Resolutions are implemented without delay.  
Turkey maintains its citizenship law, which enables foreign investors to obtain Turkish 
citizenship. The conditions are either to invest USD 250 000 in Turkish real estate, which 
must be maintained for a minimum of 3 years, or deposit USD 500 000 into a Turkish bank 
account, to be held for a minimum of 3 years with no access to funds. Such investor 
citizenship schemes pose risks for the EU. A robust monitoring system linked to this scheme 
should be put in place, in particular to counter possible security risks such as money 
laundering, terrorist financing and infiltration of organised crime. Particular attention should 
be given to enhanced customer due diligence in the context of the investors’ citizenship 
programme. 
Chapter 6: Company law  
The EU has common rules on the formation, registration and disclosure requirements of a 
company, with complementary rules for accounting and financial reporting, and statutory 
audit. 
Turkey is well advanced in the area of company law. Limited progress was made in this 
area through improved commercial registry e-services, and in the area of corporate 
governance and shareholder rights. As no progress was made on financial reporting, the 2020 
recommendations remain valid. 
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular: 


===== PAGE 81 =====
 
79 
 
 make progress in alignment with the EU acquis in the company law area; 
 adopt the financial reporting standards for small and micro companies to achieve further 
EU acquis alignment. 
On company law, no legislative action was taken during the reporting period. Alignment is 
needed on some outstanding issues including cross-border mergers, domestic mergers and 
divisions, and takeovers, while alignment is also needed with the 2019 company law acquis 
on the use of digital tools and on cross-border operations. As regards the disclosure of 
company documents there are still no provisions in place requiring publication of annual 
accounts for all limited liability companies in the business register. The Ministry of Trade 
improved commercial registry e-services to include the general assembly module, electronic 
document and electronic announcement services. However, it is still not possible to file 
online company documents to the business register or to complete fully online the 
registration process of limited liability companies in the business register. In the area of 
corporate governance and shareholder rights, Turkey has adopted significant measures in the 
field of material transactions or Environmental, Social and Governance reporting in the 
context of listed companies.  
Concerning corporate accounting and auditing, alignment with the EU acquis on financial 
reporting standards for small and micro companies is long pending. There is still no clarity 
concerning alignment of non-financial information and reports on payments to government.  
Specific provisions apply for the statutory audit of public-interest entities, and a system of 
investigations and sanctions for the companies that are subject to independent audits is in 
place. The Public Oversight, Accounting and Auditing Standards Authority has inspected and 
investigated selected audit files of 70 audit firms and 4 auditors in 2020. Further work is 
required to align with the EU acquis on accounting and statutory audit. 
Chapter 7: Intellectual property law  
The EU has harmonised rules for the legal protection of intellectual property rights (IPR) 
and of copyright and related rights. Rules for the legal protection of IPR cover, for instance, 
patents and trademarks, designs, biotechnological inventions and pharmaceuticals. Rules for 
the legal protection of copyright and related rights cover, for instance, books, films, 
computer programmes and broadcasting. 
Turkey has a good level of preparation in this area in terms of legislation. There was no 
progress during the reporting period. Despite some trainings for the customs officers on 
counterfeiting and increased online services for industrial property holders, there was an 
increase in counterfeit goods originating from Turkey. Recommendations from last year’s 
report were only partially met and remain valid. 
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular: 
 improve enforcement measures to efficiently fight against industrial and intellectual 
property infringements including online sales of counterfeit and pirated goods, improve 
the specialisation in Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) courts and the procedures to 
obtain search and seizure warrants at lower criminal courts; 
 sustain a constructive dialogue with IPR owners to improve efficient implementation 
and effective enforcement of the new Industrial Property Law in particular in cases of 
cancellation requests of an unused registered trademark and in cases of accelerated and 
simplified destruction procedures; 


===== PAGE 82 =====
 
80 
 
 ensure collection and processing of accurate statistical data, especially on effective 
judicial enforcement of intellectual and industrial property rights, with a view to 
facilitating the analysis of systemic IPR deficiencies in Turkey. 
Concerning copyright and related rights, no progress was achieved as the long pending 
draft Copyright Law was not adopted. Training on copyright and related rights protection was 
organised for police officers and anti-piracy commission members. Despite the high level of 
alignment with the EU acquis, systemic issues with regard to collective rights management 
continued negatively affecting the overall efficiency of the copyright system.  
Even though physical piracy by street vendors decreased due to the COVID-19 pandemic 
conditions, unauthorised use of copyrighted material via online platforms increased. Pirate 
traders were opening e-shops at well-known e-commerce websites. Economic interests of 
consumers and producers were infringed without efficient redress.  
The long awaited code of conduct for patent agents and trademark agents was adopted and 
the supervision of trademark and patent agents improved considerably. Enforcement of 
trademarks has become faster and more effective in the course of the reporting period. The 
Turkish Patent and Trademark Office (TPTO) continued to expand the use of online 
applications and developed its call centre services.  
Concerning judicial enforcement, the establishment of specialised Intellectual Property (IP) 
courts has strengthened the quality of IPR enforcement in Turkey by creating a framework in 
which consistent jurisprudence can be developed. However, most of the specialised and 
experienced IPR judges and prosecutors are no longer serving, while the number of IPR 
courts remains insufficient. Despite the possibility to demand higher sanctions, the criminal 
courts rarely order deterrent fines for commercial scale IP infringements. Difficulties in 
obtaining search and seizure warrants against counterfeit goods worsened, particularly in 
Istanbul. Enforcement authorities, in particular the police and judges, lack sufficient 
resources and training to take efficient action against IP infringements. Although the 
industrial property legislation allows for accelerated destruction, the related provisions were 
still not properly enforced. IPR in Turkey continued to be hampered by long judicial 
proceedings, insufficient level of compensation, delayed verdicts on penalties, and storage 
costs of goods (paid by rights holders). Revocation, opposition and invalidation procedures 
for trademarks were disproportionally expensive and overly long. Judges continued to 
excessively require expert witness statements, since judges lack the required level of 
specialisation. Conflict of interest situations of expert witnesses remained unsolved. 
On counterfeiting, Turkey continued to be among the top producers of counterfeit beverages, 
perfumes, cosmetics, shoes, clothing, and personal accessories. Online sales of counterfeit 
goods at well-known websites and consumer complaints about those goods increased. 
raining sessions for customs officers on counterfeit goods were organised with the 
participation of around 100 trademark owners. Access to properly prepared statistical data on 
IPR was not ensured. Moreover, judicial statistics on IPR were not publicly accessible. 
There is a need for awareness campaigns run by IPR-related public institutions on the 
dangers of counterfeiting and piracy on public health and consumer safety, as well as on the 
economic benefits of IPR-intensive sectors.  
Chapter 8: Competition policy  
EU rules protect free competition. They include antitrust rules against restrictive agreements 
between companies and abuse of dominant position and also include rules on concentrations 
between companies, which would significantly impede competition. EU rules also set out a 


===== PAGE 83 =====
 
81 
 
system of State aid control. Governments are only allowed to grant State aid if restrictive 
conditions are met, with a view to prevent distortion of competition. 
Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of competition policy. There was some 
progress during the reporting period concerning the alignment of the competition legislation 
with the EU acquis. Serious concerns persist as regards the legislative framework, 
enforcement capacity and transparency in the field of State aid. The Commission’s 
recommendations from previous years were not addressed and remain valid. 
In addition to addressing the shortcomings set out below, Turkey should in particular: 
 set up an operationally independent State aid authority and ensure transparent 
implementation of the State aid rules; 
 ensure implementation of the State Aid law by adopting implementing legislation without 
further delay; 
 provide access to a transparent and up-to-date inventory of all aid schemes. 
Anti-trust and mergers 
The legislative framework is broadly aligned with the EU acquis. The Law on the 
Protection of Competition broadly reflects Article 101 and 102 of the Treaty on the 
Functioning of the European Union. Implementing legislation in this field is largely in place. 
In June 2020, Turkey amended the Law on the Protection of Competition and introduced a 
significant impediment on effective competition test on mergers and acquisitions, “de 
minimis” rule, as well as commitments and settlement procedures. The implementing 
legislation concerning the “de minimis” rule and the commitment procedure were put into 
force in March 2021. 
Regarding the institutional framework, the Turkish Competition Authority is responsible 
for implementing the Law on the Protection of Competition. Its remit is very similar to that 
of the European Commission. The Competition Board is the decision making body of the 
Turkish Competition Authority and is governed by seven members. Although the Turkish 
Competition Authority is affiliated to the Ministry of Trade, it has administrative and 
financial autonomy. However, the direct appointment of the President and the members of 
the Competition Board by the President of the Republic without specific requirements on 
education and sector experience and involvement of other relevant institutions (e.g. the 
Turkish Parliament) impairs the independence of the Turkish Competition Authority. 
The enforcement capacity of the Turkish Competition Authority is adequate. In 2020, 
overall implementation was effective and the number of decisions in the area of antitrust 
(65, as compared to 69 in 2019), exemption/negative clearance decisions (34, as compared to 
35 in 2019) and merger/acquisition/joint venture/privatisation (208, as compared to 220 in 
2019) remained in the same range as in the previous year. The total amount of principal fines 
imposed by the Authority for the infringements of competition cases (fines related to 
substance) significantly increased to TRY 1.9 billion from an average of TRY 290 million for 
the previous five years. The total number of ex-officio investigations and preliminary 
investigations remained low (from 10 in 2019, to 8 in 2020). The Turkish Competition 
Authority conducted an average of 32 dawn raids throughout 2020. The Turkish Competition 
Authority needs to publish detailed data on complaints having led to investigations and dawn 
raids, in order to ensure transparency of its enforcement capacity. In 2020, 80 % of the 155 
judgements concluded as a result of the appeals against the Turkish Competition Authority 
decisions were upheld by Turkish courts. 


===== PAGE 84 =====
 
82 
 
State aid 
The legislative framework is partially in line with the EU acquis. State aid regulations do 
not cover the agriculture, fisheries and services sectors, which are not part of the EU-Turkey 
Customs Union. Turkey’s primary State aid law is broadly in line with Articles 107 and 108 
of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. However, it is not practically 
enforceable due to the lack of implementing legislation and an operational institutional 
framework. Turkey repealed a set of deadlines previously defined in the law and empowered 
the President to delay the enforcement of implementing legislation for an unlimited period. 
Therefore, Turkey still needs to adopt an action plan for alignment of the legislation with the 
EU acquis. 
Concerning the institutional framework, the Economic Policies Council is responsible for 
implementing the State aid law and the President of the Republic is the appointing authority 
of this Council's members. The Directorate-General for Economic Programs and Research, 
established under the Ministry of Treasury and Finance, coordinates State aid. The existing 
structure is not considered operationally independent. 
Turkey is not implementing State aid control, notably because the organisational structure is 
not functional and the implementing legislation is not in force. In 2020, the implementation 
of the project-based investment programme, where public support is provided on a selective 
basis, reached 34 projects with an investment amount of TRY 115.16 billion. In 2019, Turkey 
put in place the technology-driven industry initiative embedded in the project-based 
investment programme and the general 2012 incentives scheme. This incentive scheme is 
aimed at securing or increasing the domestic production in medium-high- and high-
technology level products, such as chemicals, pharmaceuticals, medical and dental 
instruments, computers, electronics and optics, electrical devices, machinery, transportation 
vehicles and other industrial products critical to the development of the selected sectors as 
identified in the 11th Development Plan. In 2021, Turkey announced a total of 919 products 
to be supported within the scope of this scheme. Award decision within the first call 
announced for the machinery sector in October 2019 were finalised in May 2021 and did not 
include financial information on the support granted. The lack of a transparent State aid 
inventory covering all aid schemes, including the amount or budgeted amount of the state 
support granted, is a source of concern.  
Liberalisation 
Competition and State aid rules apply to state-owned enterprises. However, the competences 
concerning the privatisation process lie with the President, who has assumed power over the 
privatisation decisions and procedures. 
Chapter 9: Financial services  
EU rules aim at ensuring fair competition between and the stability of financial institutions, 
namely banking, insurance, supplementary pensions, investment services and securities 
markets. They include rules on authorisation, operation and supervision of these institutions. 
Turkey has a good level of preparation in the area of financial services. There was some 
progress during the reporting period, with the adoption of the implementing regulation for 
the preparation of prevention plans by systemically important banks. Turkey also took 
important steps towards accelerating the digital transformation of the banking sector. There 
was little implementation of the 2020 report's recommendations. 
In addition to addressing the shortcomings set out below, in the coming year Turkey should 
in particular: 


===== PAGE 85 =====
 
83 
 
 further strengthen bank governance and supervision, crisis management and the 
resolution framework; 
 improve the transparency of asset quality review by publishing the details of stress test 
scenarios and methodology; 
 continue to support the development of Turkish capital markets and their proper 
supervision. 
Regarding banks and financial conglomerates, Turkey adopted the regulation laying down 
the principles and procedures for the preparation and implementation of the prevention plans 
by systemically important banks. They are required to assess any potential systemic and/or 
bank-related risks that could lead to deterioration of their financial structure and to present 
accordingly measures to mitigate those risks to the Banking Regulation and Supervision 
Agency. 
In in order to encourage lending and sustain economic activity in the wake of the COVID-19 
crisis, the Turkish authorities adopted a series of measures, including application of low 
reserve requirements for banks with a growing lending portfolio, credit extensions, 
instalment postponements and flexible loan payment options. As of the end of 2020, the 
Central Bank lifted the rules linking the reserve requirement ratios and remuneration rates to 
real loan growth rates of banks. The Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency abolished 
completely the asset ratio requirement imposed to commercial and participation banks as of 1 
January 2021, which was introduced in April 2020 to promote lending and support the 
economy during the pandemic crisis. The capital adequacy ratio of the banking sector fell to 
17.9 % in April 2021, but remained above the regulatory minimum and historic averages. 
As part of the measures to mitigate the economic impact of the COVID-19 outbreak, the time 
allowed for certain loans to remain unpaid before they are classified as non-performing loans 
was increased from 90 to 180 days, until 31 December 2020. This measure was further 
extended until end of September 2021. This measure and the increase of new loans 
contributed to the decline in the ratio of non-performing loans from 5.3 % in the beginning of 
2020 to 3.7 % in April 2021. Turkey needs to conduct comprehensive and transparent asset 
quality review processes and adopt a resolution plan for the non-performing loans. 
There was further progress in adapting new technological developments to banking services. 
The Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency introduced electronic agreements for 
various financial transactions and developed remote identification methods to help banks 
acquire new clients and establish contractual relationships in electronic environment. 
In the area of insurance and occupational pensions, Turkey adopted in June 2020 the 
legislative framework related to the organisational structure, duties and authorities and the 
working principles and procedures of the Insurance and Private Pension Regulation and 
Supervision Agency. The Agency effectively became operational. 
As regards financial market infrastructure, Borsa Istanbul introduced some amendments in 
the trading principles, the listing of capital market instruments and in the market structure of 
the equity market, mainly in view of increasing market liquidity.  
In the area of securities markets and investment services, the Banking Regulation and 
Supervision Agency changed the legislative framework to expand the scope of financial 
instruments eligible for repo and reverse repo transactions, such as for debt instruments 
issued by the Turkish Wealth Fund and the participation shares of some investment funds. 
Saving finance companies were included in the scope of the law on financial leasing, 
factoring and financing companies and thus entered under the supervision of the Agency. 


===== PAGE 86 =====
 
84 
 
Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection  
EU rules protect consumers’ economic interests and in relation to product safety, dangerous 
imitations and liability for defective products. The EU also ensures high common standards 
for tobacco control, blood, tissues, cells and organs as well as medicines for human and 
veterinary use. The EU also ensures high common standards for upholding patients’ rights in 
cross-border healthcare and tackling serious cross-border health threats, including 
communicable diseases. 
There is a good level of preparation for legislative alignment of health and consumer 
protection. There was limited progress on last year’s recommendations, with positive 
developments on institutional capacity in public health. Positive developments were also 
noted on establishing a constructive dialogue with stakeholders and on strengthening the 
consumer movement.  
In the coming year, Turkey should continue to: 
 strengthen consumer rights enforcement and further improve coordination and 
cooperation with the consumer movement and with enforcement bodies; increase raising 
awareness activities; take more measures on infringements in the digital environment and 
for special needs consumers; 
 increase its institutional/administrative capacity, inter-sectoral cooperation, financial 
resources and appropriate diagnostic facilities to address public health issues at central 
and provincial level. 
Consumer protection 
The national legislation is mostly aligned with the EU acquis on consumer protection in 
non-safety related issues. In July 2020, the implementing legislation on identifying main 
responsibilities and ethical principles of expert witnesses assigned to consumer arbitration 
committees was adopted, which was considered to be a positive development. Further 
implementing legislation on renewal, certification, marketing of second-hand products and 
authorisation of renewal centres which aims at increasing consumer awareness and 
preventing consumer complaints in this field was adopted in August 2020. An action plan 
and an agenda for supporting consumer organisations were adopted and a specialised unit for 
Consumer NGOs in the Ministry of Trade was established. 
The Consumer Information System (TÜBİS), which allows consumers to submit and track 
their complaints electronically, significantly shortened the duration of the processing of 
consumer complaints. The first public policy analysis on consumer protection in Turkey was 
prepared. Dialogue among consumer NGOs was strengthened leading to the establishment of 
the first confederation of consumer organisations. Countrywide trainings for judges and 
arbitration committee members, traders, public institutions and consumer NGOs continued. 
Further and sustainable efforts are needed to improve consumer rights enforcement, 
consumer awareness and education, cooperation and coordination of sectoral stakeholders. 
Online sales of unsafe or counterfeit products threatening public health and consumer safety 
via e-commerce web-sites needs further regulation and monitoring. 
With regard to safety-related measures, the Unsafe Products Information System (GÜBİS) 
continued to make available information to consumers. The DG for Consumer Protection and 
Market Surveillance of the Ministry of Trade carried out product controls in 1 242 companies 
in 2020. The number of products inspected was 10 960 278, out of which 1 567 950 products 
were found unsafe and removed from the market, and administrative fines totalling TRY 995 
033 of were imposed against 35 companies. 


===== PAGE 87 =====
 
85 
 
Public health 
On horizontal aspects of public health, the COVID-19 pandemic has pushed the health 
system and healthcare workers to their limits. Turkey was successful in keeping new case and 
mortality rates much lower at the onset of the outbreak, compared to other countries in the 
region. However, between end July and November 2020, the official reports included only 
the number of patients requiring medical attention, and did not include confirmed 
asymptomatic cases. At the end of November 2020, Turkish authorities adjusted the daily 
COVID-19 case count to international practice of counting all detected cases, including 
asymptomatic ones. Turkey was affected by a third wave in early 2021, leading to a sharp 
increase in number of people to be treated in intensive care units, fatalities and the imposition 
of a strict new national lockdown in April 2021. By early September 2021, more than 6.5 
million people have been infected by COVID-19 and nearly 59 000 lost their lives as per 
official figures. According to local authorities and professional association, the actual 
numbers could be higher. More precise data regarding socio-demographic variables and key 
factors associated with the spread of the pandemic is needed for the fight against COVID-19. 
Turkey launched its anti- COVID-19 vaccination programme in January 2021. As of 
beginning of September, 63 % of the population had received two doses. Turkey is 
supporting six projects on national vaccine development, including one in the form of a nasal 
spray. Turkey stated its commitment of intent to participate in the COVAX facility but has 
not officially joined.  
In the field of communicable diseases, the EU supported Turkey to build capacity by 
providing tools, guidelines, and technical support for strengthening inter-sectoral 
coordination and enabled it to train personnel at central and provincial levels in support of the 
COVID-19 response. It also helped to reinforce the physical and human resources capacity of 
the ‘National virology laboratory’ for genomic surveillance and supported Turkey towards a 
well-functioning early warning and response system, in the area of epidemiology and 
surveillance capacity of the public health system. Cross-sectoral linkages and coordination 
with other relevant structures, including the area of civil protection, remain to be enhanced. 
Turkey needs to strengthen and further expand capacities for population-based surveillance 
and testing for COVID-19 to monitor trends and detect clusters. 
The COVID-19 outbreak had an impact on the capacity of the health system to continue the 
delivery of essential health services. The ability to address and respond to non-
communicable diseases was disrupted, including for children. Non-communicable diseases 
are the leading causes of death and disability accounting for 89 % of all deaths, according to 
WHO.  
In the field of tobacco control, the regulation of March 2019 requiring plain packaging and 
larger health warnings by the manufacturer started to be implemented in December 2019. 
From January 2020, tobacco products with previous packaging are not allowed to be sold in 
the domestic market. 
As the mental health services were disrupted by the pandemic, the Ministry of Health 
established a hotline to offer consultation services on a 24/7 basis for the patients with mental 
health disorders. The National mental health action plan aimed to promote mental wellbeing 
was revised to cover the period 2020-23. An independent body to monitor and inspect mental 
health institutions remains to be established. 
As regards health inequalities, overall access to health services was maintained also for 
refugees throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. At the same time, the most vulnerable, 
including poorer segments of society, those working in the informal economy and refugees 


===== PAGE 88 =====
 
86 
 
were affected disproportionately due to COVID-19-related restrictions and reduced economic 
activity. This has led to reduced access to food and adequate nutrition for households with 
low earnings.  
In the field of substances of human origin, despite COVID-19, there was good progress. 
The patient blood management strategy and action plan was completed and national patient 
blood management guidelines were published. Hemovigilance system became operational 
and the entire transfusion system was integrated to the overall personal health data recording 
system at national level. The capacity remains insufficient for enforcement, inspection of 
blood banks and transfusion centres at central and local levels and for tissue and organ 
transplantation. Turkey ranks first in the world for living organ donors, however, the rate for 
deceased organ donors is low due to religious, cultural, and ethical reasons resulting in high 
numbers of patients on waiting lists.  
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH  
This cluster covers: information society and media (Chapter 10), taxation (Chapter 16), 
economic and monetary policy (Chapter 17), social policy and employment (Chapter 19), 
industrial policy (Chapter 20), science and research (Chapter 25), education and culture 
(Chapter 26), and customs union (Chapter 29).  
Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of information society and media. It 
continued backsliding, mostly due to inadequate competition, concentration of media 
ownership and the lack of independence of regulatory authorities. Turkey’s preparations in 
the area of science and research are well advanced and it continued to implement the action 
plan to boost the national research and innovation capacity and to align with the European 
Research Area. Turkey is moderately prepared on education and culture, and needs to 
further improve inclusive education, with a particular focus on girls and children from 
disadvantaged groups. 
On the economy-related chapters, there has been mostly backsliding during the reporting 
period. This was notably the case on enterprise and industrial policy, mainly due to Turkey 
bringing in measures incompatible with EU industrial policy principles, and on economic and 
monetary policy, reflecting intensified political pressure on the central bank. There was also 
backsliding in the area of social policy and employment, linked to the curtailment of trade 
union rights, the lack of genuine social dialogue and persistent levels of informal economic 
activity. 
On taxation, while Turkey is moderately prepared, there is a need for a clear strategy, 
avoiding frequent changes in tax rates and enabling tax information exchange with all EU 
Member States. Turkey maintains a good level of preparation for the customs union but 
made limited progress, including in its implementation. Turkey’s deviations from its 
obligations under the EU-Turkey Customs Union continue, contributing to a high number of 
trade irritants. 
Chapter 10: Information society and media  
The EU supports the smooth functioning of the internal market for electronic 
communications, electronic commerce and audio-visual services. The rules protect consumers 
and support universal availability of modern services. 
Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of information society and media. 
Backsliding continued. Inadequate competition in broadband market, excessive taxation and 
costs for operators and consumers of information and communications technologies 


===== PAGE 89 =====
 
87 
 
remained. Serious concerns regarding the lack of transparency of media funding, 
concentration of media ownership, political influence on editorial policies, restrictions on 
freedom of expression and lack of independence of regulatory authorities were not addressed.  
As last year’s recommendations were not addressed, they remain valid. In the coming year 
Turkey should in particular: 
 align the universal service, authorisation arrangements, market access and rights of way 
in electronic communications with the EU acquis; 
 strengthen the independence of the regulatory authority and its board members and 
amend the Internet Law in line with the Venice Commission’s recommendations with a 
view to ensuring media pluralism; 
 take steps to strengthen the public broadcaster’s independence. 
On electronic communications and information and communications technologies, no 
progress was made in aligning the legislation with the EU acquis on market access and 
universal service. The lack of independence of the Board and the Cyber Security Council 
remains a concern. 
Competition in fixed voice market improved. The share of alternative fixed voice operators 
was 58.5 % in the third quarter of 2020, against 49.4 % in 2019. Lack of sufficient 
competition in the broadband market remains. Mobile broadband penetration slightly 
increased to 78.2 % in the third quarter of 2020 against the OECD average of 112.8 %. The 
fixed broadband penetration rate was 19.1 % compared to the OECD average of 31.4 %. The 
number of 4.5G subscribers remained nearly stable with 76.5 million in the third quarter of 
2020 compared to 76 million subscribers in the last quarter of 2019. The Internet Law was 
not brought in line with the UN and Council of Europe recommendations. This remains a 
source of concern. 
Regarding the information society services, the National Cyber Security Strategy (2020-
2023) was published. The number of services offered from the e-Government Gateway rose 
from 5170 in 2019 to 5450 in 2020 and to 5479 in April 2021. The number of integrated 
institutions is 791. The proportion of citizens using e-government slightly increased from 
51.2 % in 2019 to 51.5 % in the first quarter of 2020. 
In the area of audio-visual policy, Turkey’s mainstream media and TV stations are largely 
controlled by pro-government companies whose other commercial interests obstruct media 
independence, encourage self-censorship and limit the scope of public debate. The need to 
access fair, balanced and impartial news coverage became even more vital during the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Channels critical of the Government’s handling faced heavy monetary 
fines by the media regulator Radio and Television Supreme Council (RTÜK). In April, the 
Constitutional Court repealed Article 2/4 of the Statutory Decree no. 6755, which paved the 
way for closing newspapers, TV channels and agencies during the State of Emergency “on 
the grounds that they pose a threat to national security”. As a consequence, decisions for 
closing 17 newspapers, 4 radio channels, 4 TV channels (25 media outlets in total) were 
repealed.  
In the first quarter of 2021, RTÜK imposed 57 administrative monetary fines and a total of 
22 broadcast suspension penalties on TV outlets whereas no action was taken against radio 
outlets in this period. With the 2019 Regulation on Radio, Television and Voluntary Online 
Broadcasts, RTÜK also has the authority to inspect online broadcasts, including news 
websites broadcasting from abroad. It obliges media service providers and platform operators 
that wish to provide services solely on the internet, to obtain broadcasting licenses. As of 


===== PAGE 90 =====
 
88 
 
April 2021, the Supreme Council granted Internet-TV television broadcasting licence to 280 
media service providers, Internet-RD radio broadcasting licence to 640 media service 
providers and Internet-IBYH online on-demand media service licence to 32 media service 
providers. Concerns over the regulation - lacking clarity in terms of its scope, definitions, 
licencing criteria and costs, and containing controversial provisions regarding jurisdiction 
and restricting access to online content - were not addressed.  
The Law Amending the Regulation of Internet Broadcasts and the Prevention of Crimes 
Committed Through Such Broadcasts, known as the Social Media Law came into force in 
October 2020. Social media companies with more than one million users in Turkey are 
required to establish legal in-country representation and to store user data of Turkish citizens 
to servers in the country. The law purports to make the internet safer for users, combatting 
cybercrime and hate speech. Despite early resistance, all social media companies have now 
complied. In April 2021, the Ministry of Interior announced initiation of legal proceedings 
against 5,478 persons, including detention of 261 persons and arrest of 11 persons due to 
their social media posts in March (see political criteria). 
Concerns over the independence of RTÜK were not addressed. Parliament elects the nine 
members of the Supreme Council in proportion to the political party groups. This cannot 
exclude political interference. Concerns over the editorial independence of the public 
broadcaster TRT were also not addressed. TRT’s senior management is appointed by the 
President. TRT regularly disregarded the voice of the opposition, minorities and the activities 
of civil society organisations critical of government policies. 
A course on media literacy is included under the list of elective courses for primary and 
secondary schools. The course programme is based on four basic skills of media literacy: 
access, analysis, evaluation and production. Additionally, there is a guiding book for 
secondary schools that covers new issues such as social media, digital rights and 
responsibilities.  
Chapter 16: Taxation  
EU rules on taxation cover value added tax and excise duties as well as aspects of corporate 
taxation. They also deal with cooperation between tax administrations, including the 
exchange of information to prevent tax evasion. 
Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of taxation, where no progress was made. 
Recommendations of the last year were addressed only partially. In the tax screening process 
for the purposes of the EU list of non-cooperative jurisdictions, concerning the automatic 
exchange of financial account information, Turkey still needs to activate effectively exchange 
relationships with all EU Member States, without any exception. 
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular: 
 put arrangements in place for the effective implementation of the automatic exchange of 
tax information with all EU Member States; 
 align the range of excisable energy products with the EU acquis; 
 continue the fight against the informal economy and transparently present the progress 
through performance indicators. 
In the area of indirect taxation, a wide range of products continued to be subject to a 1 % 
value added tax (VAT), contrary to the EU acquis. Turkey needs to further align the 
legislation on structure, exemptions, special schemes and the scope of reduced rates with the 
EU acquis. In 2020, as part of the measures against the COVID-19 pandemic, Turkey 


===== PAGE 91 =====
 
89 
 
reduced the VAT for a long list of goods and services from 18 % to 8 % and some others 
(including accommodation) from 8 % to 1 %. The measure was extended until the end of July 
2021. In addition, VAT for private education services (for 2020-21 academic year) was 
lowered from 8 % to 1 % and delivery of the COVID-19 vaccines until 31 December 2021 is 
subject to a 1 % VAT rate. 
Although the overall level of taxation on cigarettes is close to EU levels, Turkey’s legislation 
on cigarette excise duties is not in line with the EU acquis in terms of the specific and 
proportional elements of the tax. Excise duties on energy products are generally well above 
the EU minimum rates. However, contrary to the EU acquis, coal and electricity are not 
subject to excise duties. Kerosene is subject to excise duty, but a 0 % tax rate applies. 
Implementation of a digital services tax (on digital advertising, content and intermediary 
services) at 7.5 % has started since March 2020. The systematic practices of introducing 
temporary tax cuts, restructuring public debts and capital repatriation, which disrupt 
voluntary tax compliance, continued in 2020. 
In the area of direct taxation, in December 2020 Turkey introduced its sixth capital 
repatriation programme since 2008. Such uninterrupted periods of capital repatriation have 
adverse effects on sustainable voluntary tax collection. In April 2021, Turkey once again 
temporarily increased the corporate tax from 20 % to 25 % for the current year and to 23 % 
for 2022, which impairs the predictability of the tax structure. Corporate tax was already 
temporarily increased from 20 % to 22 % for 2018, 2019 and 2020. The new rates are above 
the 21.5 % average for statutory corporate income tax among EU Member States. Turkey 
delayed the implementation of the luxury housing tax, which was introduced in 2019 for 
residential property with a value exceeding TRY 5 million until 2021. 
Regarding administrative cooperation and mutual assistance, on 18 February 2020, EU 
Finance Ministers called on Turkey to comply with the requirements for effective exchanges 
of information under the OECD Common Reporting Standard by 31 December 2020. By the 
end of 2020, while Turkey had activated the exchange of information with 21 Member States, 
Turkey had made no progress in the effective exchange of information with the remaining six 
Member States. 
In its Conclusions of February 2021 the Council called on Turkey to fully commit on a high 
political level by 31 May 2021 to effectively activate automatic information exchange 
relationships with the six remaining Member States by 30 June 2021, and to send information 
for fiscal year 2019 to all Member States by 1 September. In May 2021, the Turkish Minister 
of Treasury and Finance provided such high level commitment in writing and by June, 
Turkey activated the automatic exchange of information with all Member States expect 
Cyprus. 
Turkey’s level of implementation concerning the Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax 
Treaty-Related Measures to Prevent Base Erosion and Profit Shifting measures, particularly 
with respect to Country-by-Country Reporting, is also being monitored. Turkey remained 
committed to improving its rating (due towards end of 2022) by the Global Forum on 
Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes for the implementation of the 
international standard for exchange of information on request. Failure to fulfil these 
commitments would put Turkey at risk of being included in the EU list of non-cooperative 
tax jurisdictions. 
In the context of the COVID-19 response measures, in March 2020, the Turkish Revenue 
Administration (TRA) laid down the principles of tax-related components of the stimulus 
package. The following categories of taxpayers were granted ‘force majeure’ status for the 
period of 1 April to 30 June 2020 (or during the curfew declared by the Ministry of Interior): 


===== PAGE 92 =====
 
90 
 
(i) taxpayers with income tax liability in terms of commercial, agricultural and professional 
earnings; (ii) taxpayers operating in 17 sectors directly affected by the COVID-19 outbreak; 
(iii) taxpayers operating in sectors where activities at the workplace were temporarily 
suspended by the Ministry of Interior; (iv) taxpayers and certified public accountants having 
chronic illness or aged 65 and over. Force majeure status meant that the deadline for 
submitting tax statements was extended to July 2020, and the due date for taxes was extended 
by six months.  
In January 2021, the taxpayers operating in sectors where employment at the workplace was 
temporarily suspended starting from 18 November 2020, were also considered to be in force 
majeure. In November 2020, the implementation of the 2 % tax (1 % until the end of 2020) 
on accommodation services was also delayed until 1 January 2022.  
Regarding operational capacity and computerisation, the TRA actively uses an electronic 
document management system. The e-tax statement implementation, initiated in 2004, 
reached 99.92 % in 2020. Efforts to establish an integrated public finance management 
information system are ongoing. The implementation of the Strategy and an Action Plan for 
the fight against the informal economy (2019-21) continued but no performance indicators 
were set to monitor the progress. 
Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy 
EU rules require the independence of central banks and prohibit them from directly 
financing the public sector. Member States coordinate their economic policies and are 
subject to fiscal, economic and financial surveillance. 
Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of economic and monetary policy. 
Backsliding continued during the reporting period, reflecting the intensified political 
pressure on the central bank. The successive dismissals of several governors undermined 
central bank independence and credibility and contributed to the erosion of market 
confidence. While the Economic Reform Programme (ERP) was submitted on time, fiscal 
notifications were submitted with some delays. There was limited implementation of the 
2020 report's recommendations. 
In the coming year Turkey should: 
 strengthen the independence and credibility of the central bank; 
 implement an appropriate monetary policy stance in view of achieving and maintaining 
price stability; 
 further align fiscal reporting and notifications under the excessive deficit procedure with 
ESA 2010. 
On monetary policy, as set out in the legal framework, the primary objective of the central 
bank is to maintain price stability, with inflation target being jointly determined with the 
government. However, the central bank has drifted away from the 5 % inflation target over 
the last decade and Turkey has been recording double-digit inflation rate since 2017, with an 
accelerating trend during the reporting period. Amid the growing inflationary pressure and 
deterioration of macroeconomic imbalances, the central bank hiked its policy rate by 1,075 
basis points, from 8.25 % to 19 % between August 2020 and March 2021. After November 
2020, the decisions of the central bank indicated a policy shift, prioritising price stability, a 
simplification of the monetary policy framework and to some extent increased transparency 
in monetary policy operations. However, the unexpected dismissal of the central bank 
governor in March 2021 again raised uncertainty about the course of monetary policy, and 


===== PAGE 93 =====
 
91 
 
triggered a new episode of exchange rate depreciation, a fall in foreign exchange reserves, 
a rise in inflation expectations and a spike in the risk premium, largely reversing the gains 
made since November 2020. 
The legislative changes introduced under the new presidential system have increased the 
powers of the President of the Republic as regards the appointment and dismissal procedures 
of the central bank governor, vice-governors and members of the Monetary Policy 
Committee. The three successive dismissals of the central bank governor in less than two 
years reflect growing political interference in monetary policy. These managerial changes 
combined with the political pressure on the central bank to lower interest rates further 
undermine its institutional and operational independence as well as its credibility. According 
to the central bank law, monetary financing of the public sector is prohibited and the public 
sector does not have privileged access to financial institutions. The principles for allocating 
the annual net profit of the central bank were changed in the law, as the obligatory allocation 
of 20 % of the profit to the Reserve Fund was cancelled and the transfer of accumulated 
extraordinary reserve funds to the Treasury without approval of the General Assembly was 
enabled. This was followed by very large transfers of the central bank profit to the Treasury. 
On economic policy, good progress was made regarding the quality of public finance. The 
2021 budget law was prepared in line with program budgeting. However, further alignment 
with the Directive on requirements for budgetary frameworks is needed, including the 
introduction of numerical fiscal rules and the establishment of an independent fiscal body 
that monitors the compliance with these rules. Although Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP) 
tables were sent in better quality and coverage, there is still room for improvement in EDP 
and government finance statistics. Turkey also needs to improve the credibility of 
macroeconomic forecasts and present a more comprehensive alternative macroeconomic 
scenario. 
The 2021-2023 Economic Reform Programme (ERP) was submitted on time. The structural 
reform priorities were better specified than in previous years. However, further efforts are 
needed to improve the quality of these measures in terms of description, timeline, estimated 
impact, risks and performance. The policy guidance set out in the conclusions of the 
Economic and Financial Dialogue of May 2020 was partially implemented, with the rate of 
implementation improving over previous years.  
Chapter 19: Social Policy and employment  
EU rules in the social field include minimum standards for labour law, equality, health and 
safety at work and non-discrimination. They also promote social dialogue at European level. 
Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of social policy and employment. There 
was backsliding during the reporting period. The 2020 recommendations were not 
implemented. In the coming year, Turkey should in particular: 
 remove obstacles limiting the enjoyment of trade union rights and use social dialogue 
effectively, including for COVID-19 socio-economic recovery measures; 
 improve the implementation of legislation pertaining to workers’ rights, notably labour 
law and health and safety at work;  
 promote employment of women by stepping up work-life balance policies and care 
services and develop policy tools for the transition to formal employment in the aftermath 
of the pandemic, including for migrant workers and workers under temporary protection. 
Turkey is moderately prepared in the field of labour law, but considerable gaps in 


===== PAGE 94 =====
 
92 
 
enforcement and implementation remain. The labour law does not cover agriculture and 
forestry workplaces with less than 50 employees, neither domestic workers, except for 
matters of health and safety at work. A regulation on teleworking was published in March 
2021, the impact of which is yet to be seen. In 2020, the rate of undeclared work fell to 
30.6 % (2019: 34.5 %), largely due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The number of labour 
inspectors (2019: 1060) remained below the benchmarks set by the International Labour 
Organisation (ILO). In 2019, the number of inspected workplaces fell by 60 % (7,298; 2018: 
18,952). The legal ban on lay-offs introduced as part of the employment protection measures 
was extended until 30 June 2021. Turkey continued the implementation of the national 
programme to eliminate child labour, which remains a serious issue. No official data are 
available on the involvement of refugee children in child labour.  
In the field of health and safety at work, Turkey is largely aligned with the EU framework 
directive. However, the obligation for low hazard workplaces with less than 50 employees to 
use occupational safety specialist and workplace doctors was postponed, for the fourth time, 
until July 2023. The national health and safety at work strategy expired in 2018, and the 
National Health and Safety at Work Council is inactive since 2018. In April 2020 legislation 
was adopted to protect health care professionals from violence and harassment, increasing 
penalties for perpetrators. Official data indicate a drop in the number of occupational 
fatalities from 1 541 in 2018 to 1 147 in 2019. The top risk sectors were construction and 
transport. A very low number (1 091) of occupational diseases was reported to the social 
security institution in 2019, pointing to underreporting. COVID-19 increased health and 
safety risks in certain sectors. According to independent sources, 330 health workers lost 
their live at work in 2020 (compared to 27 fatalities in 2019).  
There was no progress in social dialogue. The Economic and Social Council has not 
convened since 2009. The tripartite consultative committee did not convene either in the 
reporting period. Some trade unions and employers’ associations put forward joint 
declarations regarding measures to be taken in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
14.4 % of registered private sector employees and 65.4 % of the public servants allowed to 
unionise are trade union members; however, only 7.8 % of registered private sector 
employees are covered by collective agreements. The double thresholds for collective 
bargaining which exist at workplace and sector levels, and the lack of right to strike for 
public servants continue to be major deficiencies for the alignment with international labour 
standards and the functioning of social dialogue. The list of public institutions whose 
employees are not allowed to unionise remained wide compared to ILO standards. Police 
crackdowns on various trade union protests, systematic dismissals of workers attempting to 
organise (despite the ban on lay-offs), arrests and criminal prosecutions of trade union 
executive members continued. 
On employment policy, the labour market situation deteriorated further. The employment 
rate (20-64) continued to drop from 53.8 % in 2019 to 51 % in 2020. decrease from 34.4 % to 
32 % for women and for men from 73.2 % to 70.1 %). The decrease in the unemployment 
rate (15-74) from 13.7 % in 2019 to 13.2 % in 2020 was likely due to the ban on lay-offs and 
unemployed people withdrawing from the labour force. In fact, the labour force participation 
rate fell from 58.4 % in 2019 to 54.9 % in 2020(women from 38.7 % to 35 %, men from 
78.1 % to 74.6 %). TURKSTAT started to publish the composite measure of labour 
underutilisation rate (15+) which reached 27.4 % in April 2021.  
The youth unemployment rate (15-24) remained almost unchanged (2020: 25.1 %, 2019: 
25.2 %), whereas the youth labour participation rate decreased markedly from 44.3 % (2019) 
to 39.0 % (2020) (men from 55.8 % to 50.1 %, women from 32.4 % to 27 %). The rate of 
young people neither in employment nor education or training (NEET) aged 15-29 increased 


===== PAGE 95 =====
 
93 
 
further (2020: 32 %, 2019: 29.5 %). Contrary to previous years, the increase was higher for 
men (from 18.3 % to 21.3 %) than for women (from 40.8 % to 42.8 %).  
The number of job and vocational counsellors in the Turkish Employment Agency (ISKUR) 
remained at the same level (4 781). COVID-19 restrictions led to a significant decrease in the 
number of people benefiting from active labour market programmes or on-the-job-trainings. 
Information on the effectiveness of the programmes is limited. ISKUR started to implement a 
new counselling model targeting NEETs registered in its database, reaching out to around 
175 000 NEETs.  
To alleviate the negative impact of COVID-19 on the labour market, Turkey initiated the 
‘Social Protection Shield’ programme. Application criteria for short-term work allowance 
(SWA), equivalent to 60 % of a minimum wage, were eased; by mid-April 2021, more than 
3.7 million employees were granted a SWA, and the scheme was prolonged until the end of 
June 2021. Under the ban on lay-offs, since April 2020 more than 2.5 million employees 
received a cash support of half of the net minimum salary, hardly sufficient to make ends 
meet without additional income or savings. In August 2020, the ‘normalisation support 
programme’ was launched, which benefitted more than 3 million workers. As of April 2021, 
the total amount of support provided exceeded TRY 51.4 billion. 
Informality continued to undermine the social security system. Moreover, informal workers 
could not benefit from the SWA or cash wage support. The specific situation of Syrian 
refugees and migrants may require tailor-made policy responses. It is estimated that 
approximately one million Syrian refugees are employed, 95 % informally. The most recent 
available official data indicate that by the end of 2019, slightly less than 100 000 work 
permits were granted to Syrian refugees. Roma citizens have been affected disproportionately 
in terms of job and income loss in the COVID-19 crisis. For people with disabilities, Turkey 
needs to expand supported employment practices, besides promoting inclusive workplaces 
and provision of appropriate work equipment (see Chapter 23 – Judiciary and fundamental 
rights). 
Turkey has a good level of preparation for using the European Social Fund. The Ministry of 
Labour and Social Security continues to manage similar sectoral funds under IPA 
programmes, covering areas of employment, education, lifelong learning and social inclusion 
(see Chapter 22 - Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments). 
Concerning social inclusion and social protection, Turkey does not have a specific policy 
framework for poverty reduction in place. The regular poverty and inequality measuring does 
not yet capture the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic and higher 
inflation have worsened the social situation of the population, despite the support measures 
provided by the government. Since there is no universal last-resort minimum income scheme 
in place, the existing social assistance schemes were increased by relatively small one-off 
payments. At-risk-of-poverty-or-social-exclusion rate increased to 33.2 % in 2019 (up from 
32.4 % in 2018 and considerably higher than the EU-27 average of 21.1 %). The at-risk-of 
poverty rate reached 22.4 % in 2019 (EU-27: 16.5 %). According to the 2020 survey on 
income and living conditions conducted by Turkstat, persistent poverty rate reached 13.7 % 
(2018:12.7 %). The severe-material-and-social-deprivation rate rose to 15.9 % (2018: 
15.4 %). Income inequality remained well above the EU average with a Gini co-efficient of 
0.41. The income quintile ratio (P80/P20) rate was 8.3 %. Inequalities and poverty have 
increased further in 2020. 
In 2020, social assistance payments amounted to TRY 69.3 billion or 1.37 % of GDP. 
Quality social services including care services for elderly people need to be enhanced. 
Municipalities also provide social services and assistance at local level, amounting to 11 % of 


===== PAGE 96 =====
 
94 
 
total social assistance. Some municipal fundraising programmes in response to COVID-19 
were blocked by the government in 2020 for allegedly political motivations. The 
implementation of the National Roma Strategy remained limited. Turkey continued the 
provision of a wide range of public and social services to almost 4 million refugees, of which 
3.6 million are Syrian nationals placed under the temporary protection regime. These efforts 
are partially funded by the EU.  
Turkey has no integrated strategy or action plan for non-discrimination in employment and 
social policy, and no data are available in this area. Discrimination on the grounds of sexual 
orientation and gender identity is not prohibited by law. Roma remain largely excluded from 
formal jobs in the absence of targeted policy measures. The hate speech/negative attitude 
towards LGBTIQ increased, which may have negative impact on access to employment and 
social protection. Discriminatory legislation and practices against persons with disabilities to 
access employment in certain occupations such as judges, prosecutors are still in place (see 
Chapter 23 – Judiciary and fundamental rights). 
On equality between women and men in employment and social policy, the gender gap in 
the labour market remains very high. Discriminatory stereotypes concerning roles and 
responsibilities of women and men remain a concern. The gender employment gap of 38.1 
percentage points in 2020 is the highest among candidate countries and potential candidates. 
The enrolment rate in early childhood education (children aged 3-5) was still low at 41.78 %. 
The implementation of some programmes supporting employment of mothers with small 
children continued, however the number of beneficiaries is marginal. Representation of 
women in decision-making positions remained very limited (see Chapter 23 – Judiciary and 
fundamental rights). 
Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy  
EU enterprise and industrial policy strengthens competitiveness, facilitates structural change 
and encourages a business-friendly environment that stimulates small and medium-sized 
firms. 
Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of enterprise and industrial policy. There was 
backsliding in the reporting period, mainly due to the introduction of measures incompatible 
with EU industrial policy principles. Major challenges concern the compatibility of 
localisation and public procurement practices with the EU industrial policy principles, the 
lack of transparency in State aid for large investments, the large informal economy, long-
term financing needs of small and medium-sized enterprises and the insufficient legal 
framework for microfinance. Recommendations of last year’s report were addressed to a very 
limited extent. 
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular: 
 remove schemes, such as local content requirements and public procurement price 
premiums, that are incompatible with industrial policy principles and substitute them with 
measures that encourage innovation effectively; 
 publish the results of the implementation of the industry strategy from 2019 to 2021 as 
well as the amounts distributed under the Industry Support Programme. 
 conduct an assessment study of all SME support measures for their impact and 
identification of gaps and overlaps. 
On enterprise and industrial policy principles, Turkey adopted a comprehensive economic 
reform package in March 2021, which contains measures for the further digitalisation of 


===== PAGE 97 =====
 
95 
 
public and business services for enterprises, enhancing digital skills (see Chapter 10), 
reforming State aid and similar incentives, internationalisation of SMEs, and the green 
transformation of industry, including notably the preparation of a circular economy plan (see 
Chapter 27). However, the package also includes measures incompatible with EU industrial 
policy principles and in some instances, with the commitments under the Customs Union, 
such as the strategic use of public procurement to the advantage of domestic producers, 
purchase guarantees for technology transfer, subsidies for the manufacturing of key export 
products and localisation. Turkey maintained the scope of the 15 % domestic price advantage 
in public procurement with compulsory use for medium and high-technology industrial 
products. The percentage of international tenders where domestic price advantage applied 
further increased in 2020 (see also Chapter 5). Turkey established an Industrialisation 
Executive Board in October 2020, tasked to take strategic decisions on public procurement 
and the localisation of supply chains among other issues. Localisation schemes continue to be 
in place or are planned in a number of sectors like pharmaceuticals, medical devices, 
biotechnological products and agricultural, and forestry tractors. A stronger research and 
innovation policy (see Chapter 25) under a more predictable innovation-friendly regulatory 
environment can constitute a more effective and EU-compatible strategic alternative. 
The results of performance indicators of the Industrial Strategy adopted in 2019 were not 
published. The informal economy remains a key challenge for Turkey. The implementation 
of the Action Plan and Strategy for the fight against the informal economy (2019-2021) 
continued with its focus on repression without addressing underlying business environment 
factors. Results are difficult to assess, since no concrete performance indicators were set and 
no data published. Turkey’s performance in enforcing contracts and resolving insolvency 
deteriorated in 2020. The Ministry of Industry and Technology established a virtual one-stop-
shop portal for information about investment support per sector in order to facilitate domestic 
and foreign direct investment. 
On enterprise and industrial policy instruments, Turkish legislation is not yet fully 
harmonised with the Late Payment Directive. The 11th Development Plan and the Industrial 
Strategy focus on technological transformation of manufacturing. Turkey intends to support 
investment in 400 product groups in strategically chosen sectors such as machinery, 
computer, electronic, optics, electrical hardware, pharmaceuticals, chemistry, and transport 
vehicles under a technology-focused Industry Support Programme. In the first call of the 
programme, 10 investment projects were supported with a total volume of EUR 81 million in 
the machinery sector. The repartition of State aid for these investments was not disclosed, 
contrary to the commitments under the EU-Turkey Customs Union. Turkey continued to 
implement various schemes supporting companies, particularly small and medium firms. 
Support for innovation eco-systems is fragmented across numerous programmes with 
regional concentration of beneficiaries, lacking a territorially-balanced approach. Smart 
specialisation strategies were formulated in some regions, but there is limited information 
about their implementation. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Turkey used various support 
mechanism for enterprises consisting of labour-related schemes (partial redundancy, short 
work, wage subsidy), deferral measures (taxes, social security premiums, utility bills) and 
financial support through loan guarantees, direct lending and subsidies. The assistance was 
largely dominated by a credit impulse, led by state-owned banks. As of June 2021, limited 
direct cash support was provided to tradesmen, small businesses and artisans. The share of 
the stimulus package is estimated to be 12 % of GDP and some four fifths came through the 
credit channel. 
Several technical assistance and financing schemes run by the SME support administration 
(KOSGEB) were operational. Additional schemes supported companies operating in COVID-


===== PAGE 98 =====
 
96 
 
19-relevant sectors. 87 technology development zones were in place, 73 of them operational. 
Their transition to Green Organised Industrial Zones could foster renewable energy and 
circular economy innovations. By January 2021, 1 277 patents were obtained from 39 940 
completed projects (in comparison to 1 117 patents from 33 921 completed projects in the 
previous reporting period). Turkey remained active in the COSME programme, the Erasmus 
for Young Entrepreneurs and the Enterprise Europe Networks).  
Chapter 25: Science and Research  
The EU provides significant support for research and innovation. All Member States can 
benefit from the EU’s research programmes, especially where there is scientific excellence 
and solid investment in research. 
Overall, Turkey’s preparations in the area of science and research are well advanced. 
Turkey made some progress during the reporting period. Notably, the implementation of 
the action plan to boost the national research and innovation capacity as well as its 
alignment with the European Research Area (ERA) has contributed positively to Turkey’s 
better performance in Horizon 2020. Turkey also started informal association discussions 
for Horizon Europe. Recommendations of last year’s report were addressed at good 
extent except for the new National Science, Technology and Innovation Strategy which is 
not completed yet. 
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular: 
 continue its efforts towards aligning its national research area (TARAL) with the 
ERA; 
 finalise the update of the National Science, Technology and Innovation Strategy; 
 assess its Horizon 2020 performance and prepare for Horizon Europe to maximise the 
benefits of EU R&I Framework Programmes. 
On research and innovation policy, the share of the R&D expenditure to GDP increased to 
1.06 % in 2019 compared with 1.03 % in 2018 (EU28 average was 2.19 %). The total 
number of full time equivalent R&D personnel increased to 182 847 in 2019 (by 6.2 %) 
compared with 172 119 in 2018. The share of female personnel remained at 32 %. Although 
the progress in figures continues, the gap between actual figures and the EU28 average 
remained significant. In 2020, the preparations for the new Science Technology and 
Innovation Strategy continued with the preparation of “Prioritized R&D and Innovation 
(RDI) Fields” document. The strategy should contribute to further impact of RDI outputs for 
more socio-economic benefits. 
In 2020, the implementation of Turkey’s action plan to boost the national research and 
innovation capacity, as well as its alignment with the European Research Area (ERA), 
contributed positively to Turkey’s performance in Horizon 2020. Turkey’s success rates in 
2019 and 2020 improved substantially compared to the average of previous years. However, 
the overall performance throughout the Horizon 2020 programme has been lower than 
expected, compared to Turkey’s R&I capacity. Turkey needs to assess its performance in 
Horizon 2020 and continue its actions to increase the participation to the next Framework 
Programme, Horizon Europe. 
On Innovation Union, Turkey dropped from a ‘moderate innovator’ in 2020 to ‘emerging 
innovator’ according to the European Innovation Scoreboard for 2021. The country fell from 
74 % to 55 % of the EU average. This strong decline was due to reduced performance on the 


===== PAGE 99 =====
 
97 
 
indicators using innovation survey data, enterprises providing ICT training, job-to-job 
mobility of human resources in science and technology, among others.    
On Smart Specialisation, with the support of EU funds Turkey started to improve Smart 
Specialisation Strategy development, implementation and networking capacities at national 
and regional levels. Five regions have been registered in the EU Joint Research Centre’s 
Smart Specialisation Platform. 
Turkey took several actions as a response to COVID-19 pandemic. These included launching 
the COVID-19 Turkey Platform that is involved in vaccine and drug development projects, 
specific calls to support research activities on diagnosis and treatment of COVID-19 and to 
analyse the social and economic impacts of COVID-19.  
Chapter 26: Education and culture  
The EU supports cooperation in education and culture through funding programmes and the 
coordination of Member State policy through the open method of coordination. Member 
States must also prevent discrimination and ensure quality education for children of migrant 
workers, including those from disadvantaged backgrounds. 
Turkey is moderately prepared on education and culture. There was some progress on this 
chapter, notably regarding the good functioning of the national qualifications system. Turkey 
also recognises the value of culture in development policies and encourages the promotion 
and protection of its cultural heritage. Last year’s recommendations were only partially 
implemented and remain valid. 
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular: 
 further improve inclusive education, with a particular focus on girls and children from 
disadvantaged groups and closely monitor and continue work to reduce the proportion of 
school drop-outs; 
 further ensure the good functioning of the Turkish Qualifications Framework and Turkish 
Higher Education Quality Council; 
 take concrete steps to implement the 2005 UNESCO Convention on the Protection and 
Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions. 
As regards education, access to early childhood education (ECE) in Turkey varies by age 
group and region. While the net enrolment rate for pre-school education (age 5) further 
increased from 68.3 % to 71.2 % during the 2019-2020 school year (70.4 % for girls, 72 % 
for boys), the combined net enrolment rate for children in Turkey aged between 3 and 5 
remains low at only 41.8 %. Flexible and community-based ECE models need to be 
implemented, guided by clear targets and strategies, which cover vulnerable children. The 
overall quality of ECE services requires improvement. 
The net enrolment rate in primary schools grew slightly from 92.1 % to 93.6 %, with 93.5 % 
for girls and 93.7 % for boys. In lower secondary school, the net enrolment rate grew from 
93.3 % to 95.9 %, with a rate of 96.1 % for girls and 95.7 % for boys. In upper secondary 
education net enrolment increased from 84.2 % to 85.0 % (84.9 % for girls, 85.2 % for boys). 
In higher education, the net enrolment rate decreased from 44.1 % to 43.4 % (46.3 % for 
girls, 40.6 % for boys). 
Both the number and the rate of students in special education (students with special needs 
who are in regular classes) increased slightly in 2020, from 398 815 in 2019 to 425 774 in 
2020, which represents an increase from 1.65 % to 1.74 %. However, there is a large 


===== PAGE 100 =====
 
98 
 
disparity between number of girls and boys with special needs in education (269,897 male 
versus 155,877 female students).  
Turkey has been participating in the EU education programmes since 2004. Applications for 
the Erasmus+ programme further increased from 12 467 in 2019 to 13 079 in 2020, showing 
a continuous high interest of Turkish education stakeholders in the programme. 1 497 new 
projects were finally contracted in 2020 for an amount of EUR 124 million. In addition, 
applications for the European Solidarity Corps (ESC) programme increased from 349 in 2019 
to 896 in 2020; EU support was awarded to 269 projects for an amount of EUR 6.12 million 
(181 volunteering projects and 88 solidarity projects) involving more than 2 000 participants. 
To mitigate the negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on both beneficiaries and 
potential beneficiaries of Erasmus+ and the ESC, Turkey implemented measures 
recommended by the European Commission. 
Turkey is at an advanced stage of implementing the Bologna process, although significant 
quality differences persist among Turkey's 207 higher education institutions. The 
reorganisation of the Turkish Higher Education Quality Council (THEQC), the national 
authority evaluating Turkish higher education institutions, led to greater administrative and 
financial independence. THEQC became a member of the European Association for Quality 
Assurance in Higher Education (ENQA) in April 2020.  
THEQC added an institutional accreditation programme to its quality assurance activities in 
2020. In order to guarantee its effectiveness, relevant higher education regulation and 
procedures need to be further adapted to THEQC regulations. Furthermore, THEQC should 
aim to further increase the size of permanent staff in order to strengthen its operational 
independence. 
Implementation of a national vocational qualifications system by the Vocational 
Qualifications Authority (VQA) is ongoing. VQA, the competent authority for preparing 
national occupational standards and national qualifications and for authorising certification 
bodies, is also in charge of implementing the Turkish Qualifications Framework (TQF). 
As of June 2021, the number of occupational standards and qualifications approved by the 
VQA increased satisfactorily for the functional implementation of the Turkish Qualification 
Framework; however, the number of vocational qualifications certificates still needs to be 
increased substantially. Studies regarding the full implementation of TQF continued under 
the coordination of the VQA. Private education certificates were integrated within the 
framework of VQA certificates. 
Although the European Qualifications Framework is referenced within the TQF, Turkey 
needs to ensure that principles and procedures relating to quality assurance, credit systems, 
inclusion of qualifications, and validation of non-formal and informal learning are fully in 
place. In the formal vocational education and training sector, implementing the modular 
curricula and credited module system, instead of the current class passing system, remains an 
important issue for the effective implementation of the TQF. 
As for culture, the Strategic Plan for 2019-2023 continued to be implemented. The strategy 
aims to develop Turkey's cultural richness and diversity, support Turkey’s transformation 
into an information society, facilitate access to culture and arts, increase the contribution of 
cultural industries to national income and strengthen intercultural interaction through cultural 
diplomacy. The strategy also underlines the need for increased cooperation with local 
governments, private and civil initiatives with the overall decision-making power resting with 
the Ministry of Culture and Tourism (MoCT). Cultural non-governmental organisations 
continued their efforts to strengthen civic participation in policy making and strategy 


===== PAGE 101 =====
 
99 
 
formulation. 
The General Directorate of Copyrights of the MoCT is responsible for the coordination and 
implementation of the 2005 UNESCO Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the 
Diversity of Cultural Expressions. Concrete action for the implementation of the Convention 
is yet to be taken.  
The COVID-19 pandemic exposed the vulnerability of the cultural sector. Public authorities 
offered support, but the measures did not represent a sufficient and permanent response. 
Without the necessary support and financial resources to keep them alive during the periods 
of lockdown, several theatre companies and galleries had to permanently close.  
Local authorities have the power to cancel artistic and cultural events. In November 2020, the 
Malatya International Film Festival was cancelled by the metropolitan municipality of 
Malatya. The cancellation followed the announcement of the festival committee that a 
gender-neutral “Best Performance” award would be given instead of “Best Actor and 
Actress” awards. In a written statement by the municipality, it was stated that the decision 
manifested an approach incompatible with local values. The Kurdish theatre play Bêrû 
(“Faceless” by Dario Fo) was banned in October 2020 on grounds of disturbing general 
public order and close links to the PKK (see Chapter 23 - Judiciary and fundamental rights). 
On youth and sport, Turkey has a relatively young yet ageing population and its median age 
is 32.6 (EU median age: 44). 13 million Turkish citizens are aged between 15 and 24. 
Turkey is among the top beneficiaries of the European Solidarity Corps (ESC) EU 
Programme, targeting youth. The Government expressed interest in renewing participation in 
the ESC in the 2021-2027 period. Between 2014 and 2020, under Erasmus+, 2 320 youth 
mobility and volunteering projects piloted by Turkish organisations were selected for a global 
amount of EUR 51.1 million. In 2020, there were 283 selected youth projects for an amount 
of EUR 9.5 million. 
Voluntary work continued to be promoted both officially and through civil initiatives. Turkey 
continued to take part in the European Sports Week initiative. 
Channels of youth participation in decision making processes, however, remained limited or 
ineffective. Government efforts are underway to establish a national youth council. 
Meanwhile, there is already an independent national youth council, granted an observer 
member status by the European Youth Forum in 2019, yet not recognised by the 
Government.  
Chapter 29: Customs union  
All Member States are part of the EU customs union and follow the same customs rules and 
procedures. This requires legislative alignment, adequate implementing and enforcement 
capacity, and access to the common computerised customs systems. 
Turkey maintains a good level of preparation for the customs union. There was limited 
progress in the reporting period. Turkey continued to apply additional duties on imports of 
a large number of products originating in third countries, which are in free circulation in the 
EU, or imported from third countries, in violation of the basic provisions of the EU-Turkey 
Customs Union. Duty relief, free zones and surveillance measures remain not fully aligned 
with the EU acquis. This is not compatible with Turkey’s obligations under the Customs 
Union either. The recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited degree. 
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular: 


===== PAGE 102 =====
 
100 
 
 step up efforts to fully align new legislation with the EU Customs Code;  
 bring risk-based controls and simplified procedures in line with the EU acquis; 
 fully eliminate import and export restrictions hampering the effective free movement of 
goods. 
 withdraw additional duties on imported products and fully align its import duties with the 
EU’s Common Customs Tariffs. 
There was limited progress in the area of customs legislation. Turkey amended part of its 
legislation to remove the requirement for a certificate of origin for goods in free circulation in 
the EU, except for implementation of specific trade defence measures. However, Turkey’s 
legislation remained contradictory in this area and implementation still remained ambiguous, 
which led the customs administration to provide successive clarifications. Also, Turkish 
customs law is yet to be harmonised with the EU Customs Code and more efforts are needed 
to improve risk-based controls and simplified procedures with a view to facilitating 
legitimate trade, while ensuring security and safety. The designation of specialised customs 
offices is contrary to the provisions of the Customs Union. Rules on surveillance, free zones 
and duty relief are yet to be aligned with the EU acquis. Turkey maintained additional duties 
applied on imports of a large number of products originating in third countries, which are in 
free circulation in the EU or imported from third countries. It also maintained export 
restrictions on copper scrap and the restriction on certain leather products. These measures 
are in breach of the Customs Union rules, as reported last year. Turkey continued to 
unilaterally apply disproportionally high duties on imports of sweet corn in contradiction 
with Customs Union rules. 
On administrative and operational capacity, efforts to strengthen customs enforcement 
capacity for border controls continued. Further alignment is required to improve customs 
enforcement of intellectual property rights. Risk-based controls to enforce safety and security 
measures need to be significantly improved. Turkey implements the computerised transit 
system as part of its membership of the Convention on a Common Transit Procedure. 
However, tariff IT systems are not yet in place. The IT strategy in line with business 
initiatives still needs to be implemented and the documented customs business processes 
aligned to the legal basis need to be kept up-to-date. 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY  
This cluster covers: transport policy (Chapter 14), energy (Chapter 15), trans-European 
networks (Chapter 21) and environment and climate change (Chapter 27).  
Turkey is moderately prepared in transport policy. It made limited progress in the 
reporting period, notably linked to the adoption of the road safety strategy and the update of 
the intelligent transport system strategy. On energy, while Turkey is moderately prepared, 
it needs to further work on the gas market liberalisation and develop cooperation on nuclear 
safety and security. Turkey has made some progress on energy and transport networks, with 
the construction of the Halkali-Kapikule railway line connecting the Bulgarian border to 
Istanbul continuing.  
Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of environment and climate change, and 
faces critical environmental and climate challenges, both as regards mitigation and 
adaptation. It made some progress, including the ratification of the Paris Agreement on 
climate change and increasing capacity in waste management, wastewater treatment and on 
legislative alignment, but enforcement and implementation remain weak. Turkey needs to 


===== PAGE 103 =====
 
101 
 
follow up with an enhanced nationally determined contribution under the Paris Agreement, 
long-term strategic decarbonisation and adaptation plans and appropriate legislation 
reflecting them domestically.  
Chapter 14: Transport policy  
The EU has common rules for technical and safety standards, security, social standards, and 
market liberalisation in road transport, railways, inland waterways, combined transport, 
aviation and maritime transport. 
Turkey is moderately prepared in transport policy. Limited progress was made in the 
reporting period. Last year’s recommendations were addressed partially: Turkey adopted a 
road safety strategy and an action plan covering 2021-2030 period as well as the updated 
intelligent transport system (ITS) strategy and the corresponding action plan until 2023.  
In the coming year Turkey should in particular: 
 prepare a new transport strategy covering all modes of transport in line with the 
Commission’s Sustainable and Smart Mobility Strategy to establish concrete targets for 
substantial mitigation from transport sector emissions until 2030 and 2050; 
 adopt its new railways sector reform and phase out the subsidies to the incumbent railway 
operator; 
 consider the European Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) Framework Architecture as 
the overarching ITS architecture especially in the urban areas. 
As regards the EU acquis on general transport, the Turkish transport legislation is not fully 
aligned with the acquis. Turkey is still not aligned with the Clean Power for Transport 
package. Urban mobility requires a more comprehensive policy framework and a clear 
institutional set up between central and local authorities. 
On road transport, the legal framework is at a good level of preparation regarding the 
alignment with the EU acquis. Some progress was made in the reporting period. Turkey 
adopted its Road Safety Strategy and Action plan in line with the Stockholm Declaration 
2020 and the EU Road Safety Policy Framework 2021-2030. The Ministry of Interior was 
appointed as the Road Traffic Safety Lead Agency. Turkey adopted a new Intelligent 
Transport System (ITS) Strategy which also foresees the adoption of a structured legal 
framework to reach safe, smart and sustainable mobility. Turkey cooperated effectively under 
the EU’s Green Lanes initiative, during the COVID-19 pandemic Turkey is expected to align 
with the revisions of road transport acquis regarding the First Mobility Package as these 
concern driving and rest periods, positioning by means of the tachograph, access to the 
occupation of road transport operator and the international haulage market, as well as posting 
drivers in the road transport sector. 
Turkey is moderately prepared in the field of rail transport. Some progress was made during 
the reporting period. The institutional setup of the Turkish railways (TCDD) still does not 
provide for effective independence neither of the railway operator from the infrastructure 
manager, nor of the railway regulator from the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure. A 
new railway sector reform is needed and a new comprehensive railway framework law needs 
to be adopted. Regulation on railway interoperability is still in its final stage of preparation. 
Subsidies to the incumbent railway operator, continued to hamper the railway liberalisation 
process.  
Turkey achieved a good level of preparation in aligning with the EU acquis in the field of 
maritime transport. Limited progress was made during the reporting period. The maritime 


===== PAGE 104 =====
 
102 
 
single window established in 2019 should be streamlined with the acquis. The Directorate 
General of Maritime Affairs in cooperation with the European Maritime Safety Agency 
organised training on Marpol Annex VI, ballast water management, and marine pollution. 
Turkey should align with the new acquis on extensive application of the once-only principle 
on port reception facilities for the delivery of waste from ships. 
Turkey has limited inland waterways and it has not signed the main international agreements 
on this issue. Turkey has not yet aligned with the relevant EU legislation on inland waterway.  
While Turkey is moderately prepared in the field of aviation, there was no progress during 
the reporting period. Further efforts are needed to align Turkish regulations with the EU, 
particularly in air traffic management and aviation safety. The Commission’s mandate for 
negotiations on a comprehensive air transport agreement expired without reaching a result 
and no progress was made on the working arrangements between the Turkish Directorate-
General for Civil Aviation and the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA). 
Moreover, the lack of adequate communication between air traffic control centres in Turkey 
and Cyprus continued to compromise air safety in the Nicosia flight information region, 
requiring an operational solution. 
There was limited progress on combined transport. In April 2021, the concept of ‘green 
logistics / transporter’ was added to the scope of the draft legislation on combined freight 
transport.  
As long as restrictions remain in place on vessels and aircrafts registered in Cyprus, related to 
Cyprus, or whose last port of call was Cyprus, Turkey will not be in a position to fully 
implement the EU acquis relating to this chapter. 
Chapter 15: Energy  
EU energy policy covers security of supply, the internal energy market, hydrocarbons, 
renewable energy, energy efficiency, nuclear energy, nuclear safety and radiation protection. 
Turkey is moderately prepared in this chapter. Overall, limited progress was made with 
Turkey continuing to develop its regulatory framework on nuclear energy, despite structural 
and staffing issues at the new regulatory body. The good progress on security of supply 
continued. The 2020 recommendations were addressed to some extent. 
On hydrocarbons, Turkey stopped illegal drilling activities in the maritime zones of Cyprus 
and the tensions in the Eastern Mediterranean decreased in the beginning of 2021. 
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular: 
 deepen natural gas market reform by setting up a legally binding plan and a timetable for 
the unbundling of activities and establishing transparent, cost-reflective and non-
discriminatory pricing in the gas sector. It should also update the natural gas market law 
to ensure compatibility with the EU's Third Energy Package; 
 adopt legislation in line with the Euratom acquis, clarifying structural, staffing and 
coordination issues in nuclear energy regulation and guarantee the independence of the 
newly established nuclear energy regulator; to complete legislative alignment in nuclear 
safety and stress tests on the Akkuyu nuclear power plant; 
 engage to discontinue local content requirement practices in the renewable energy sector, 
as such practices contradict WTO and EU-Turkey Customs Union rules. 
The good progress on security of supply continued, thanks to the now operational Trans-
Anatolian Pipeline (TANAP) transmitting gas to the European section of the Southern Gas 


===== PAGE 105 =====
 
103 
 
Corridor (SGC). The gas flow to Europe started on 1 January 2021 with the completion of the 
Trans Adriatic Pipeline (TAP). The construction of Turkey's third Floating Storage 
Regasification Unit (FSRU) LNG terminal, operated by BOTAŞ, on the Aegean coast was 
completed. The Turkstream pipeline, linking Russia to Turkey, became fully operational and 
started to deliver gas to several southern EU Member states markets. 
On the internal energy market, limited progress was made on transparent, cost-reflective 
and non-discriminatory pricing mechanisms for electricity and gas. The vertically integrated 
BOTAŞ continued to enjoy dominant market position. This affects the true viability of the 
recently established Energy Exchange Istanbul (EXIST), where a market of derivatives was 
launched in 2021. This should provide more depth and liquidity to the market. 
The natural gas market law update is long overdue. The lack of progress on Turkey’s gas 
market liberalisation is linked to, among others, the lack of transparency around the pending 
renegotiation of some of the country’s long-term natural gas supply contracts with Russia.  
In 2020, Turkey's spot LNG imports increased markedly. The spot volumes from Qatar grew 
by 32.1 %, compared to last year, to 3.2 bcm. Spot LNG imported from the United States 
reached 3 bcm, which is an increase of 144 % in comparison to last year. Turkey imported 
LNG also from Norway, France, Spain and Cameroon. 
On hydrocarbons, Turkey is at an advanced stage of alignment with the EU legislation but it 
has to further align with Directive 2013/30/EU on the Safety of Offshore Oil and Gas 
Operations, also as regards transit of hydrocarbons. Due to continued and new unauthorised 
Turkish hydrocarbon exploration activities in the maritime zones of Cyprus and Greece, 
tensions in the Eastern Mediterranean and Aegean Sea increased in the second half of 2020. 
In November 2020, the Council extended the duration of the existing framework for 
restrictive measures. Turkey stopped illegal drilling activities in the maritime zones of 
Cyprus and the tensions in the Eastern Mediterranean decreased in the beginning of 2021. 
Following a strategy of maximising the use of domestic and renewable energy sources, in 
2020, the share of the country’s renewable energy in the electricity generation reached 44 %, 
most of which came from hydropower (29 % percent). The ratio of renewable energy 
installations in the total installed power generation capacity increased from 45 % last year to 
51 % in 2020. 
The growth in Turkey’s installed renewable energy capacity was driven mainly by private 
investments benefitting from a preferential USD-based feed-in-tariff, expiring in mid-2021. 
The extension of that support mechanism was announced in January 2021. Like before, a new 
financial support scheme entered into force in June 2021 (right after the current one expires) 
and facilities commissioned until December 2025 will benefit from it for the next 10 years 
that follow. Contrary to the previous scheme, the new one is based on the Turkish Lira. The 
new scheme continues the additional financial incentives for the use of domestic equipment 
in renewable energy installations initially by 5 years, until 2026. That extension of the Local 
Content Requirement (LCR) practices in Turkey continues to raise concerns. LCR practices, 
applied especially in state-defined Renewable Energy Zones, contradict WTO and the EU-
Turkey Customs Union rules and affect the EU’s and other international companies’ 
competitiveness on the Turkish energy market. 
There was some progress in the implementation of adopted legislation on energy efficiency. 
The National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) of 2018 reflects Turkey's efforts to 
achieve the objectives set out in the country's Energy Efficiency Strategy, on a year-by-year 
basis towards 2023. There is insufficient clarity on policy continuation and sustainability 
beyond that timeline. The national energy efficiency financing mechanism, envisaged under 


===== PAGE 106 =====
 
104 
 
the NEEAP, is still not in place, despite the EU’s recommendation on its timely adoption. 
National financing mechanism for energy efficiency was not established. Procedures and 
principles regarding Energy Performance Contracts in the public sector were published in 
August 2020.  
On nuclear energy, nuclear safety and radiation protection, Turkey continued to develop 
its regulatory framework despite structural and staffing issues at the new regulatory body. 
Regulations on Management of Radiological Emergencies, on Nuclear Security of Nuclear 
Facilities and Nuclear Materials, on Safeguards, on Nuclear Export Control, on 
Environmental Reinstatement Activities of Areas Exposed to Radioactive Pollution and on 
Administrative Sanctions of the Nuclear Regulatory Authority were adopted. In March 2021, 
the country’s Constitutional Court annulled the 2018 Law by which the Nuclear Regulatory 
Authority (NDK) was established; to avoid a legal vacuum, the Court gave a transition period 
of one year for the nuclear regulatory body to continue its activities and requested the 
Government to prepare a new legislation which should enter into force no later than March 
2022. 
The Turkish Energy, Nuclear and Mineral Research Authority (TENMAK), responsible, 
among others, for radioactive waste management and disposal, research and training 
activities in the nuclear energy sector, succeeded the older Turkish Atomic Energy Authority 
(TAEK). The transition of qualified personnel and functions between the two authorities in 
the nuclear energy sector has happened with little transparency.  
Regarding the Akkuyu nuclear power plant and following Turkey’s voluntary commitment of 
2011 to conduct stress tests using the EU model, an agreement between the Commission and 
the Turkish nuclear regulatory authority has been reached to move from the previously 
envisaged two-phase approach to a more streamlined, single-phase approach. The next step 
will be the organisation of a transparent peer review of Turkey’s National Report by the 
Commission and the European Nuclear Safety Regulators Group, in which Turkey 
participates as an Observer. 
Turkey still needs to accede to the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management 
and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management; and become a member of the European 
Community Urgent Radiological Information Exchange system. 
Chapter 21: Trans-European networks 
The EU promotes trans-European networks in the areas of transport and energy to 
strengthen the internal market and contribute to growth and employment. 
Turkey is well advanced on trans-European networks. There is some progress on energy 
networks, thanks to the now operational Trans-Anatolian Pipeline (TANAP) transmitting gas 
to the European section of the Southern Gas Corridor (SGC) as well on transport networks 
given that the construction of the Halkali-Kapikule railway line connecting the Bulgarian 
border to Istanbul continued. Last year’s recommendations were only partially addressed. 
In addition to addressing the shortcomings set out below, in the coming year Turkey should 
in particular: 
 accelerate efforts to align with key pieces of the EU acquis to facilitate alignment in 
TEN-T networks; 
 establish a transparent, cost-reflective and non-discriminatory gas transit regime in line 
with the EU acquis; 
 accelerate efforts for the preparations of the third bridge railway connections. 


===== PAGE 107 =====
 
105 
 
As regards energy networks, there was some progress on energy networks, thanks to the 
now operational Trans-Anatolian Pipeline (TANAP) transmitting gas to the European section 
of the Southern Gas Corridor (SGC). As regards gas networks and Transmission System 
Operator (TSO) cooperation, the membership of Turkey’s National Petroleum Corporation 
(BOTAŞ) to the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Gas (ENTSO-G) 
is not foreseen. The state-owned BOTAŞ remained vertically integrated and dominant on 
Turkey’s gas market with its trading and grid operator functions, which stifles market 
competition. The natural gas market law update is long overdue. Limited progress was made 
on establishing a transparent, cost-reflective and non-discriminatory pricing in the gas sector. 
(See Chapter 15 - Energy). Although the Turkish electricity Transmission System Operator's 
(TEIAŞ) observer membership of the European Network of Transmission System Operators 
for Electricity (ENTSO-E) was not renewed, TEIAŞ continues to be present in technical 
discussions of relevant working groups.  
As regards electricity networks, the modernising and upgrading of the Turkish electricity 
network in line with the ENTSO-E standards continued. An important challenge for the 
Turkish electricity system will be to provide for a secure integration of increased amounts of 
renewable energy. In terms of interconnections with Europe, Turkey can import 650 MW of 
electricity and export 500 MW through its existing lines with Bulgaria and Greece. Technical 
studies for expansion of these lines and a new interconnection with Romania through the 
Bulgarian system are ongoing. 
As regards transport networks, Turkey continued to regularly encode TEN-T network data 
to the transport information management systems (TIMS). 38 % of the Halkali-Kapikule 
railway line project has been completed despite the COVID-19 pandemic context. The 
railway monitoring board was established and the first meeting was held in September 2020. 
Turkey needs to accelerate the work towards preparation and financing of the third Istanbul 
bridge connections, as this is a condition in the financing agreement with the EU. The 
remaining land acquisition and the interface of the Canal Istanbul project with the 
development of these railway projects continue to be a source of concern. 
Chapter 27: Environment and climate change 
The EU promotes strong climate action, sustainable development and protection of the 
environment. EU law contains provisions addressing climate change, water and air quality, 
waste management, nature protection, industrial pollution, chemicals, noise and civil 
protection. 
Turkey has some level of preparation in this area, and faces critical environmental and 
climate challenges, both as regards mitigation and adaptation. There was some progress, 
including in relation to the ratification of the Paris Agreement by the Turkish Parliament and 
thereby addressing an important recommendation from last year. In the field of climate, 
Turkey needs to follow up with an enhanced nationally determined contribution under the 
Paris Agreement, long-term strategic decarbonisation and adaptation plans and appropriate 
legislation reflecting them domestically. Positive developments were noted on increasing 
capacity in waste management and wastewater treatment as well as legislative alignment, but 
enforcement and implementation remain weak. Last’ year recommendations were 
implemented only partially and remain mostly valid. More ambitious and better coordinated 
environment and climate policies need to be established and implemented. Strategic 
planning, substantial investment and stronger administrative capacity are required as well. 
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular: 
 complete alignment with the directives on waste, water and industrial pollution, and 


===== PAGE 108 =====
 
106 
 
ensure that the Environmental Impact Assessment Directive is correctly implemented; 
 ensure alignment with the EU acquis and actual implementation on public participation 
and the right to access environmental information; 
 Enhance and implement its contribution to the Paris Agreement on climate change, and 
complete its alignment with the EU acquis on climate action. 
Environment 
Turkey has achieved some level of preparation in the area of horizontal legislation. Turkey 
has an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) legislation which is mostly aligned with the 
EU EIA Directive. However procedures for transboundary consultations are not aligned with 
the EIA and the Strategic Environmental Assessments (SEA) Directives. Regarding the 
implementation of the EIA legislation, there are remaining concerns about the non-
application or politicisation of court decisions in controversial projects with high 
environmental impacts and the respect of the right to environmental information. The public 
concerns on the Canal İstanbul Project - an artificial sea-level waterway connecting the Black 
Sea and the Sea of Marmara - led to several court cases against the EIA approval. 
A comprehensive impact analysis is still required for this major project as well as the 
initiation of transboundary consultations with the riparian EU Member States and other states 
of the Black Sea and the Mediterranean Sea. Turkey is still not party to the Aarhus and Espoo 
Conventions. Turkey has aligned with the SEA Directive in some sectors, while gradual 
implementation for different sectors was ongoing. Alignment on environmental liability 
remains limited. Turkey revised its By-law on Environmental Inspections in June 2021. The 
National Environment Agency was established in December 2020 and is expected to become 
operational by 2022. 
Turkey is part of the EU sea basin strategy Common Maritime Agenda for the Black Sea 
(CMA) endorsed by Ministerial declaration in May 2019. The CMA is a regional cooperation 
framework to support sustainable blue economy in the Black Sea whose goal is to focus on 
healthy marine and coastal ecosystems.  
On air quality, national legislation still needs to be adopted in line with EU directives on 
ambient air quality and national emissions ceilings. Severe air pollution in some cities is 
reported on an annual basis. A national strategy for air quality monitoring is in place and all 8 
planned regional networks are established and operational. The Stage II Petrol vapour 
recovery legislation is in place for new installations and a phased implementation approach is 
adopted for existing installations.  
The legal framework on waste management is partially aligned with the new EU acquis. 
Turkey adopted a strategy promoting a zero waste management approach, the efficient use of 
natural resources, landfilling reduction and increased recycling and reuse. In December 2020, 
Turkey introduced a ban on import of mixed plastics as of 2021, but did not ratify the Basel 
Convention 2019 Amendment. The legislation on zero waste adopted in July 2019 continued 
to be implemented. The Ministry is the main responsible institution for waste management 
policy making. Turkey deferred its plans to introduce the deposit system from 2021 to 2022. 
Alignment and capacity for sorting, recycling and medical waste treatment continued. 
Significant efforts are necessary to implement waste management plans at local and regional 
level. Legislation on ship recycling which would mirror the requirements of the EU Ship 
Recycling Regulation was not adopted. There are concerns regarding safety, sound waste 
management and environmental hazards in the ship recycling facilities registered in the EU 
list of ship recycling facilities. In the meantime, the current notification procedure practices 
are in line with the Basel Convention. 


===== PAGE 109 =====
 
107 
 
In the area of water quality, the legislative alignment is advanced but implementation and 
enforcement should be improved. Transboundary consultations on water issues are still at an 
early stage. Turkey did not align yet with the revised EU Directive on Drinking Water. 
Wastewater treatment capacity increased as a result of continuous investments and with the 
establishment of 1,134 waste water treatment plants in the country, reached a coverage of 
87 % of the municipal population. Turkey aims to reach 100 % by 2023. Turkey still needs to 
align with the EU Marine Strategy. 
Turkey has some level of preparation on nature protection. No progress was made on 
adopting the framework legislation, the national biodiversity strategy and an action plan. 
Planning and construction in wetlands, forests and natural sites are still not in line with the 
EU acquis. The institutional framework for managing future Natura 2000 sites needs to be 
streamlined and adequately resourced. The review of the status of protected areas continued 
over 2020 in a non-transparent and non-participatory manner resulting in the changes in 
status and boundaries of a number of potential Natura 2000 areas. 
In industrial pollution and risk management, alignment with the EU acquis is at an early 
stage. Turkey still needs to align with the Industrial Emissions Directive, European Pollutant 
Release and Transfer Register (E-PRTR) legislation, the eco-management and audit scheme, 
solvents and the Paints Directive. 
On chemicals, the overall level of legislative alignment is advanced but implementation and 
enforcement remained weak. Turkey is only partly aligned with the European Regulation on 
Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH). Registration 
process started in January 2021 via the Chemicals Registration System (CRS) with a 
transitional period of enforcement from 2021 until 2023. Turkey adopted legislation aiming 
at the alignment with the latest EU Directive on Persistent Organic Pollutants in March 2021.  
Alignment with legislation on noise is well advanced but implementation and enforcement 
need to be improved. Noise mapping and local noise action plans were not finalised.  
On civil protection, Turkey’s collaboration under the EU Civil Protection Mechanism 
(UCPM) increased in 2020, both in registering capacities to the European Civil Protection 
Pool and offering assistance under the UCPM during emergencies. Turkey also showed more 
interest in obtaining support under the UCPM. Turkey submitted the country’s national risk 
assessment report. It still has to submit the summary of the assessment of risk management 
capability and information on priority prevention and preparedness measures for certain types 
of disaster risks, as required by the revised EU civil protection legislation. Turkey is 
encouraged to install the Secure Trans European Services for Telematics between 
Administrators (sTESTA) system to be able to connect through the Common Emergency 
Communication and Information System (CECIS) with the Emergency Response 
Coordination Centre (ERCC) of the European Commission. 
Climate change 
Turkey made some progress on climate change over the reporting period, notably with the 
ratification of the Paris Agreement in October 2021 (pending submission of its ratification 
instrument to the United Nations) and announcing the country would aim at reaching net-zero 
emissions by 2053. These steps need to be followed up  with the swift adoption of an 
enhanced nationally determined contribution and a long-term strategy under the Paris 
Agreement, consistent with the EU climate framework and factoring in the perspective of 
net-zero by 2053; the existing national strategy and action plan address climate change 
mitigation concerns only partially and in a short-term perspective (up to 2023). 
Mainstreaming of climate action into other sector policies remained limited. Regarding its 


===== PAGE 110 =====
 
108 
 
other commitments under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, Turkey 
submitted the latest national inventory on greenhouse gasses in April 2021.  
Turkey’s legislation was not aligned with the Emission Trading Directive and with the EU’s 
economy-wide greenhouse gas monitoring mechanism. Turkey still needs to fully implement 
the Fuel Quality Directive. Alignment on emissions standards for new cars was also pending. 
An alignment plan for the Carbon Capture and Storage Directive needs to be established. 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION  
This cluster covers: agriculture and rural development (Chapter 11), food safety, veterinary 
and phytosanitary policy (Chapter 12), fisheries (Chapter 13), regional policy and 
coordination of structural instruments (Chapter 22), and financial and budgetary provisions 
(Chapter 33).  
Turkey reached some level of preparation in the area of agriculture and rural development. 
There was backsliding in the reporting period, as its agricultural policy diverged from the 
main principles of the EU common agricultural policy. Turkey is a major exporter of food 
products to the EU, and made limited progress in the area of food safety, veterinary and 
phytosanitary policy. Turkey needs to make further progress on meeting EU standards, 
particularly on pesticide residues. It made good progress on fisheries, in implementing the 
fisheries law, resources and fleet management, and inspection and control. 
Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of regional policy and the coordination of 
structural instruments. Overall, it made some progress in this area, especially in accelerating 
the absorption of IPA II funds and in addressing some structural weaknesses. Turkey has 
some level of preparation in the area of financial and budgetary provisions and made 
limited progress during the reporting period to strengthen administrative capacity and to 
design implementing rules for the correct application of the own resources system. 
Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development  
The common agricultural policy supports farmers and rural development. This requires 
strong management and control systems. There are also common EU rules for quality policy 
and organic farming.  
Turkey reached some level of preparation in the area of agriculture and rural development. 
There was backsliding with respect to the recommendations from last year. There is still no 
strategy for producing agricultural statistics. Turkey’s agricultural support policy is moving 
away from the common agricultural policy’s principles and Turkey restricts imports of 
agricultural products from the EU. 
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular: 
 adopt and start to implement a strategy for producing agricultural statistics; 
 develop and start to implement a strategy to align its agricultural support policy with the 
EU acquis, including the definition of cross-compliance standards. 
On horizontal issues, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry took measures to minimise 
the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. In this regard, several initiatives were 
introduced such as the digital agricultural market, agricultural research and innovation, an 
awareness raising campaign on food waste, and digitalisation of training and extension 
services. 
Turkey continued to move away from the principles governing agricultural direct support 


===== PAGE 111 =====
 
109 
 
under the common agricultural policy, notably by increasing the support coupled to 
production and aiming at shifting to a region or basin-based management model. 
Turkey needs to take further steps for the implementation of the integrated administration and 
control system (IACS). The farm accountancy data network (FADN) covers all 81 provinces 
and was integrated into the agricultural production and registration system. The agricultural 
census is not yet complete and the strategy for agricultural statistics remains to be adopted. 
Further alignment with EU policies requires the decoupling of payments from production and 
linking area-based payments to well-defined cross-compliance standards. 
On common market organisation, a regulation on beef carcass classification was published. 
Sharp decline in imports of live cattle, beef and derivate products from the EU continued in 
the reporting period. Turkey is yet to fully implement its obligations under the EU-Turkey 
trade agreement for agricultural products, by opening quotas for beef and live animals on a 
lasting basis. Proper and transparent management of import quotas needs to be implemented. 
On rural development, the EU instrument for pre-accession assistance for rural development 
programme (IPARD II) continued operating relatively well in terms of calls organised, 
applications submitted and contracts signed despite the COVID-19 pandemic. Ten calls were 
organised (of which 2 calls in 2020). 24 223 project proposals were submitted (of which 5 
870 proposals in 2020), 8 502 contracts signed (of which 4 249 in 2020). Turkey amended its 
IPARD II programme to increase the uptake of the measures and to accelerate spending of 
the available funds. Under the LEADER measure, contracts were signed with 50 Local 
Action Groups in 12 provinces and consultations started to expand LEADER applications in 
15 additional provinces. The National Rural Network continued its activities aimed at a more 
efficient implementation of the programme and coordination among various stakeholders. 
Implementation of the pilot agri-environment-climate measure continued, including the 
preparation to expand its scope by adding a biodiversity protection operation. Turkey started 
actively preparing its next programme – IPARD III.  
On quality policy, Turkey continued to implement legislation on the protection of 
Geographical Indicators, which is largely aligned to the EU acquis. Alignment with the EU 
acquis on principles and implementation of organic farming is well advanced. The Turkish 
Accreditation Agency accredits organic agriculture control bodies. 
Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy 
EU hygiene rules for foodstuff production ensure a high level of food safety. Animal health 
and welfare and the safety of food of animal origin are safeguarded together with the quality 
of seeds, the plant protection material, the protection against harmful organisms and animal 
nutrition. 
Turkey reached some level of preparation in the area of food safety, veterinary and 
phytosanitary policy. There was limited progress in the past year concerning the 
implementation of animal identification and registration. Last year’s recommendations were 
only partially taken up. Food establishments are yet to be upgraded to meet relevant EU 
standards. Full implementation of the EU acquis in this area requires significant further work. 
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular: 
→ upgrade food establishments to meet EU standards, and submit a national programme, 
→ make significant progress in meeting EU pesticide residues - maximum residue limits, and 
submit a monitoring plan; 
→ make further progress in addressing zoonoses. 


===== PAGE 112 =====
 
110 
 
There was limited progress in aligning and implementing the EU acquis on general food 
safety. The number of RASFF-notifications (Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed) on 
findings of pesticide residues in fruits and vegetables imported from Turkey into the EU 
remained unacceptably high, especially in 2020 when new standards on chlorpyrifos and 
chlorpyrifos-methyl became applicable. Turkish authorities are requested to do their utmost 
to improve this situation. 
Turkey is yet to fully align its veterinary policy with the EU acquis. The identification and 
registration of bovines and small ruminants continued. Turkey extended the electronic 
identification system to cattle. Identification and registration of equiadea started. Border 
control posts (BCP) at land and sea borders, and at the (EU-funded BCP) Sabiha Gökçen 
Airport in Istanbul were not fully operational. 
Turkey continued its fight against animal diseases. Foot and mouth disease outbreaks 
decreased as a result of mass vaccination. The disease-free zone ensured by vaccination in 
the area of western Turkey bordering Bulgaria and Greece was maintained by strict 
movement controls. Vaccination against lumpy skin disease continued. Significant efforts are 
still needed to fully align with the EU acquis on transmissible spongiform encephalopathies 
and surveillance systems, including full compliance with the February 1998 Decision of the 
EU - Turkey Association Council on the trade regime for agricultural products. A Regulation 
concerning sampling, transport, import, export and laboratory conditions on the trade regime 
of veterinary biological samples was published. 
Implementation of the legislation concerning animal welfare during transport was not 
launched and further structural and administrative work is necessary to fully implement the 
EU acquis in this area. There was some progress on zoonoses, with the implementation of the 
Salmonella control programme. 
Turkey continued implementing training, inspection and monitoring programmes for the 
placing of food, feed and animal by-products on the market. The administrative capacity 
for official controls was improved. No progress was made on developing the national plan for 
upgrading agri-food establishments. Significant work is still needed to apply the new rules on 
registering and approving food establishments. Substantial work is also required on animal 
by-products. Provisions for funding inspections are not yet aligned with the EU system. 
Alignment of food safety rules with the EU acquis advanced on issues such as labelling, 
additives and purity criteria, flavourings, food supplements and enzymes. Progress on 
specific rules for feed remained limited. 
Progress on the phytosanitary policy remained limited. Alignment is yet to be ensured for 
novel food and for genetically modified organisms. 
Chapter 13: Fisheries  
The common fisheries policy lays down rules on fisheries management, protects living 
resources of the sea and limits the environmental impact of fisheries. This includes setting 
catch quotas, managing fleet capacity, rules on markets and aquaculture and support for 
fisheries and coastal communities. 
Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of fisheries. Good progress was made as 
regards implementation of the fisheries law, resources and fleet management, and inspection 
and control. Last year’s recommendations were largely taken up. 
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular enhance further multilateral cooperation on 
fisheries, including at the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean (GFCM), the 
Ministerial Conference on Black Sea fisheries sustainability and at the GFCM post-2020 


===== PAGE 113 =====
 
111 
 
Strategy Conference, including on fisheries management, compliance and illegal, unreported 
and unregulated fishing.  
Some progress was made on resources and fleet management. Following the amendment of 
fisheries law, legislation regulating commercial and recreational fishing was published in 
August 2020. The legislation, which includes provisions on technical measures (such as 
minimum mesh size, depth, and distance from the coast, fishing gear, minimum sizes, 
maximum percentages of bycatch), covers the period of 2020-2024. The information systems 
established to manage fisheries and fishing fleet became functional and contributed to 
monitoring, control and surveillance. The institutional capacity of data collection and stock 
assessment improved. 
On inspections and control, good progress was made in legislative alignment and on 
implementation of the recommendations of the International Commission for the 
Conservation of Atlantic Tunas and the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean. 
Control measures and sanctions were further improved with implementation of the amended 
fisheries law. 
On market policy, through EU financial assistance Turkey improved the institutional 
capacity and awareness on fisheries producer organisations. Regarding international 
agreements, Turkey continued cooperating with the EU in the regional and international 
platforms. As the EU implements provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of 
the Sea, inter alia in the common fisheries policy, Turkey’s ratification of the Convention 
would improve cooperation with the EU on fisheries and maritime policy. 
Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments  
Regional policy is the EU’s main investment policy for sustainable and inclusive economic 
growth. Member States bear responsibility for its implementation, requiring adequate 
administrative capacity and sound financial management of project design and execution. 
Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of regional policy and the coordination of 
structural instruments. Overall, some progress was made in this area, especially in 
accelerating the absorption of IPA II funds and in addressing some structural weaknesses. 
Last year’s recommendations remain valid. In the coming year, Turkey should in particular: 
 improve the formulation of a general framework and appropriate statistical tools for 
monitoring and evaluation of the National Strategy for Regional Development (NSRD) 
and Regional Development Agencies' (RDA) performance. 
 continue the implementation of the action plan established by the National IPA 
Coordinator (NIPAC), National Authorising Officer (NAO) and Audit Authority (AA) in 
order to strengthen the monitoring activities concerning the implementation of sector 
operational programmes and prioritisation of actions as well as improve the overall 
performance in managing EU funds. 
No progress was made in the legislative framework. Mechanisms for evidence-based 
policymaking, policy and programme evaluations, and impact assessment are not yet in 
place. 
Formulation of a general framework and appropriate statistical tools for monitoring and 
evaluation of the National Strategy for Regional Development (NSRD) and Regional 
Development Agencies' (RDA) performance needs to be improved. Implementing legislation, 
which would enable the RDAs’ involvement in the decision-making processes at regional 
level, was not enacted. Despite the existence of a NSRD and the RDAs, regional level 


===== PAGE 114 =====
 
112 
 
considerations were still not fully included in policy-making at central level. The linkage 
between policy documents and institutional plans remained weak and led to deficiencies in 
the proper allocation of resources.  
On the institutional framework, some improvements concerning capacities for IPA II 
management such as tendering, contracting, and payment execution were achieved. The 
functioning of the IMBC authorities is monitored by the National IPA Coordinator office 
(NIPAC) in coordination with the National Authorising Officer (NAO) under the regular 
oversight of the Presidential Office. The Financial Cooperation Committee, which groups all 
IMBC authorities, met regularly. The role of the NIPAC needs to be further strengthened to 
ensure effective coordination amongst ministries, prioritisation of interventions under IPA III 
and monitoring of impacts. Organisational measures within the Ministry of Treasury and 
Finance need to fully guarantee the independence of the Audit Authority from the influence 
of the other bodies that are under its audit scope. 
There continued to be progress in strengthening the administrative capacities of IPA 
management authorities, when it comes to internal procedures, contracting and disbursement 
rates. The implementation of the action plan established by the NIPAC and NAO continued 
to deliver positive results, despite some delays posed by the COVID-19 pandemic and related 
measures. 
Some progress was made in programming. Project pipelines were established by all IPA 
structures for the IPA II period 2014-2020 under multi-annual operational programmes 
(MAAPs), despite budgetary cuts applied to 2019 and 2020 allocations. Turkey submitted 
action documents for 2021 and 2022 IPA allocations; however the number and overall budget 
of these proposals was excessive in light of the available annual resources in the EU budget, 
indicating a weak prioritisation capacity of the NIPAC. 
Limited progress was achieved on monitoring and evaluation. Steps were taken to improve 
the project implementation, data analysis and overall monitoring capacity. All managing 
authorities 
and 
the 
National 
IPA 
Coordinator 
(NIPAC) 
have 
their 
own 
Information/Management Information Systems and a technical assistance for Result Oriented 
Monitoring was supporting the NIPAC office to monitor the implementation. However, 
capacities must be further strengthened, on-the-spot checks monitoring activities improved, 
and reporting at outcome level enhanced. 
Concerning financial management, control and audit, no de-commitments were performed 
at the end of 2020, notably because of increasingly higher absorption and contracting rates in 
the MAAPs, despite the adverse effect of the COVID-19 pandemic and related measures. 
Implementation and disbursements rates, however, need to further progress. The Audit 
Authority strengthened its capacities; it still needs to improve quality controls, control 
methodology and knowledge of its staff concerning audit of infrastructure projects and 
verification of performance aspects, including compliance with sound financial management 
rules and outcome achievement (see Chapter 32 – Financial control). 
Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions  
This chapter covers the rules governing the funding of the EU budget (‘own resources'). 
These resources mainly consist of: (i) contributions based on the gross national income of 
each Member State; (ii) customs duties; (iii) the non-recycled plastic resource and (iv) a 
resource based on value-added tax. Member States must have the appropriate administrative 
capacity to adequately coordinate and ensure the correct calculation, collection, payment 
and control of own resources. 


===== PAGE 115 =====
 
113 
 
Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of financial and budgetary provisions. 
Limited progress was made during the reporting period. Solid coordination structures, 
administrative capacity and implementing rules for the correct application of the own 
resources system will need to be set up in due course. Last year’s recommendation was not 
addressed. 
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular further align the GNI Inventory with 
Eurostat’s GNI Inventory Guide. 
Basic principles and institutions in the underlying policy areas linked to the application of the 
own resources system are already in place (see Chapters 16 - Taxation, 18 - Statistics, 29 - 
Customs union and 32 - Financial control). The Customs Union with the EU on processed 
agricultural goods and industrial goods (with the exception of coal and steel products) 
continues to ensure considerable alignment of Turkey’s customs legislation with the EU 
acquis on customs while a draft customs law aligned with the Union Customs Code is yet to 
be adopted. This will facilitate preparation in traditional own resources, i.e. mainly customs 
duties. 
For the value added tax-based resource, preparation is needed to correctly calculate the 
VAT base and the weighted average rate. Sound measures are needed to combat VAT and 
customs duties fraud and resolute actions are needed to tackle the non-observed economy. 
Turkey needs to further align the legislation on structure, exemptions, special schemes and 
the scope of reduced rates with the EU acquis. 
Concerning the gross national income-based resource, Turkey needs to continue its efforts 
to bring its national accounts and GNI calculations fully in line with the European system of 
accounts (ESA 2010) and to improve exhaustiveness of the estimates, ensuring that they take 
account of the non-observed economy. There is a need to further align the GNI inventory 
with the Eurostat’s Inventory Guide and improve the timely transmission of data.  
As concerns the administrative infrastructure, Turkey needs to set up a fully operational 
coordination structure, with appropriate administrative capacity and implementing rules, to 
ensure that it will be able to correctly calculate, forecast, account for, collect, pay, control and 
report own resources to the EU in line with the EU acquis. 
CLUSTER 6: EXTERNAL RELATIONS  
There are two chapters in this cluster: external relations (Chapter 30), and foreign, security 
and defence policy (Chapter 31). Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of external 
relations, notably due to the continuing deviations from the Common Customs Tariff and the 
common commercial policy. It made limited progress in the reporting period, when it 
successfully concluded a trade agreement with the UK after the EU-UK agreement. 
Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of foreign, security and defence policy. 
There was backsliding in the framework of political dialogue on foreign and security policy 
as Turkey’s increasingly assertive foreign policy continued to collide with the EU priorities 
under the common foreign and security policy. 
Chapter 30: External relations  
The EU has a common trade and commercial policy towards third countries, based on 
multilateral and bilateral agreements, and autonomous measures. There are also EU rules in 
the field of humanitarian aid and development policy. 
Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of external relations. There was limited progress 


===== PAGE 116 =====
 
114 
 
in the reporting period, notably in light of the conclusion of the agreement with the United 
Kingdom after the completion of the EU-UK new agreement. Turkey’s large deviation from 
the Common Customs Tariff remained with a wide scope of additional customs duties, and 
divergence from the EU Generalised Scheme of Preferences remained in place infringing on 
the EU-Turkey Customs Union. The recommendations from last year were not implemented. 
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular: 
→ urgently re-align the customs tariff with the Common Customs Tariff; 
→ complete alignment with the EU’s Generalised Scheme of Preferences and dual-use export 
control regime. 
There was no progress on the common commercial policy. The additional duties applied on 
a large number of imported products remained in place and were further expanded to 
additional product categories. The imposition of additional duties significantly impaired 
Turkey’s once good level of alignment with the EU common commercial policy. In addition, 
Turkey did not converge to the EU’s Generalised Scheme of Preferences in terms of either 
countries or products. New investigations initiated on the basis of weak evidence, and the use 
of safeguards where more targeted trade defence measures - such as the anti-dumping 
instrument - would have been more appropriate, remained a cause of concern. There is a need 
for closer coordination between the EU and Turkey within the World Trade Organisation, in 
particular on the Doha Development Agenda, in the OECD and the G-20. 
On export controls on dual-use goods, Turkey did not align with the EU position on certain 
multilateral export control arrangements, such as the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export 
Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies, and the Missile 
Technology Control Regime. There is still no alignment with the EU position on medium- 
and long-term export credits. 
Regarding bilateral agreements with third countries, Turkey concluded a free trade 
agreement with the United Kingdom following the entry into force of the EU-UK Trade and 
Cooperation Agreement, aiming for trade continuity after the withdrawal of the UK from the 
EU. Turkey continued to implement its free trade agreement with Malaysia, although the EU 
has no such agreement with that country. In addition, Turkey concluded and implemented an 
agreement with Venezuela. 
As for development policy and humanitarian aid, official development assistance (ODA) 
granted by Turkey stood at EUR 7 billion, equivalent to 1.12 % of its gross national income 
(GNI) in 2020, thus further exceeding the 0.7 % target enshrined in the Sustainable 
Development Goal 17. This assistance was largely directed towards humanitarian support for 
the Syria-related activities on Turkey’s own territory. 
Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy  
Member States must be able to conduct political dialogue under EU foreign, security and 
defence policy, to align with EU statements, to take part in EU actions and to apply agreed 
sanctions and restrictive measures. 
Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of foreign, security and defence policy. 
There was backsliding in the framework of political dialogue on Common Foreign and 
Security Policy (CFSP) as Turkey’s increasingly assertive foreign policy continued to collide 
with the EU priorities under CFSP, notably due to its support for military actions in the 
Caucasus, Syria and Iraq. While the institutional framework enabling Turkey's participation 
in CFSP and the Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) is in place, Turkey 


===== PAGE 117 =====
 
115 
 
maintained a very low alignment rate of around 14 %. Turkey’s military support in Libya, 
including the deployment of foreign fighters on the ground, and its persistent criticism of, and 
lack of cooperation with Operation IRINI, are detrimental to the EU’s effective contribution 
to the UN arms embargo implementation, and have led to conflicting approaches on Libya. 
Turkey wants to see a stable and prosperous Syria, an objective it shares with the EU. The 
recommendations from last year were addressed only to a very limited extent.  
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:  
 take decisive steps to significantly improve alignment with EU declarations and Council 
decisions on the Common Foreign and Security Policy;  
 enhance further the political dialogue on foreign and security policy with the EU. 
The high level political dialogue between the EU and Turkey on foreign and security policy 
issues did not take place. The political dialogue took place only at senior official level. In 
December 2020 and in June 2021, the President of the European Council and the President of 
Turkey held a telephone call discussing outcomes of European Council debates on Turkey; 
Contacts at Presidential and Ministerial level continued, notably in the framework of the 
April 2021 meeting of the Presidents of the European Council and the European Commission 
with the President of Turkey in Ankara. In August 2021, the President of the European 
Council and the President of Turkey held a telephone call on the situation in and around 
Afghanistan. The High Representative/Vice President met his Turkish counterpart on several 
occasions. Turkey attended a number of events organised or supported by the EU, including 
the Brussels V Syria Conference in March 2021. Discussions focused on regional conflicts, 
in particular Syria, Libya, Iraq, Afghanistan, Eastern Europe and the South Caucasus. 
(See Political criteria – Regional issues and international obligations - for more information 
on developments on bilateral relations with other enlargement countries and EU Member 
States.) 
The institutional framework enabling Turkey's participation in the common foreign and 
security policy (CFSP) and the common security and defence policy (CSDP) is in place 
both at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Defence. CFSP alignment 
remained at very low levels reaching 14 % as of August 2021 compared to 11 % in 2020 and 
21 % in 2019. Turkey in particular never aligns with EU restrictive measures, including that 
of economic sanctions. Regarding CSDP, Turkey participated in Operation EUFOR 
ALTHEA as the biggest non-EU troop contributor.  
Turkey continued to seek its involvement in EU defence initiatives (PESCO, EDF). Turkey’s 
narrow interpretation of the EU-NATO cooperation framework continued to pose an obstacle 
to building a genuine organisation-to-organisation relationship, in particular by limiting the 
exchange of information and blocking the inclusive participation of all Member States in 
joint activities of the two organisations.  
The Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ annual strategic document “Enterprising and 
Humanitarian Foreign Policy” is regularly updated and presented to the Parliament for 
approval. Turkey posits foreign policy narratives such as “local and national”, “strong in the 
ground, strong at the table” or “the world is bigger than five”. Turkey’s foreign policy 
dialogues with non-EU actors increasingly focused on trade and defence cooperation. Turkey 
stressed the importance of global cooperation in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. 
As a supporter of multilateralism, Turkey was contributing to nine international (UN, NATO 
and EU-led) peace support and observer missions. Turkey participated at the virtual UN 
General Assembly in September 2020, making a strong plea for multilateralism, and 


===== PAGE 118 =====
 
116 
 
continued to voice support for the reforming of the UN Security Council. It reiterated its 
dedication to the 2030 Agenda of the Sustainable Development Goals. Turkey participated at 
the virtual G20 Riyadh Summit in November 2020 and the virtual OSCE Ministerial 
Council in December 2020. 
Turkey participates in, and complies with, the different international regimes/instruments 
concerning the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. However, it obstructs 
participation of the Republic of Cyprus in the Conference on Disarmament. 
With regard to hybrid threats, in the context of international conflicts and crises, the 
circulation of false information on social media and in mainstream media has been observed 
also in the Turkish information environment. Access to factual information, while 
guaranteeing the full respect for freedom of media, is crucial to mitigate the deepening of 
existing tensions and to facilitate peace building as well as conflict prevention. 
Despite a number of challenges in bilateral U.S.-Turkish relations, Turkey remains an 
important partner and NATO ally for the United States. The Turkish purchase of Russian 
S-400 air defence missiles has led to Turkey being subjected to US Countering America’s 
Adversaries through Sanctions Act (CAATSA) sanctions, in force since April 2021. 
Notwithstanding the imposed sanctions, Turkey kept refusing to part with its military 
investment. The competent US appeals court’s decision was pending over Turkey’s state-
owned Halkbank’s role in helping Iran evading US sanctions. Turkey continued to demand 
the US to extradite Fetullah Gulen for having orchestrated the 2016 coup attempt in Turkey. 
US support to the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) was a major grievance of Turkey. 
However, the engagement of the new US administration with Turkey, including at the 
Leaders’ level was constructive. The US administration expressed its intention to engage 
closely with Turkey on regional issues, including Afghanistan, humanitarian access to Syria, 
and counterterrorism activities. Canada cancelled export permits for military goods and 
technology to Turkey following the results of an investigation into allegations that Canadian 
technology was being used by the Azerbaijani military forces in the Nagorno-Karabakh 
conflict. 
Turkey maintained its contacts with the countries of Latin America through its humanitarian 
diplomacy, providing medical supplies and equipment to Paraguay, Brazil and Venezuela.  
Turkey continued to pay a particular attention towards Africa. The Third Turkey-Africa 
Economic and Business Forum was organised online in October 2020, in collaboration with 
the African Union Commission. Turkish interests and businesses are particularly active in 
Somalia, not without risks as often illustrated by al-Shabaab attacks on Turkish contractors. 
Turkey improved its rhetoric and made repeated outreach towards Egypt. Respective 
positions were still divergent on many issues, notably Libya, energy cooperation in the 
Eastern Mediterranean and the Muslim Brotherhood. Turkey also softened its tone towards 
Israel, however, it continued to criticise its settlement policy and intervened in defence of 
Palestinian interests, in particular during the flare-up of violence in May 2021. 
Regarding relations with Libya, Turkey repeatedly expressed that it favours an agreement in 
the framework of the Libyan political process. Turkey quickly contacted the new Libyan 
interim administration under the leadership of interim Prime Minister Dbeibah and the Head 
of the Presidential Council Menfi. Turkey continued to assert the validity of the Turkish-
Libyan maritime delimitation and military agreements of 2019 which the EU considers an 
infringement upon the sovereign rights of third States, not complying with the Law of the Sea 
and having no legal consequences for third States. In April 2021, the first Turkey-Libya High 
Level Strategic Cooperation Council was held, focusing on political and economic aspects. 


===== PAGE 119 =====
 
117 
 
Both sides signed five Memoranda of Understanding, mainly in the construction sector. 
The persistent foreign interference in Libya continued to challenge seriously the 
implementation of the UN-led Berlin process. Turkey claimed that the UN embargo 
provisions, the articles on withdrawal of foreign elements and the suspension of military 
training in the cease-fire agreement are not applicable to the legitimate government. On a 
regular basis, the Turkish Ministry of Defence issued statements on ongoing training with 
Libyan forces and the legitimate presence of Turkish military forces. The presence of 
mercenary forces was a complicating factor. Turkey maintained its unjustified opinion that 
Operation IRINI is not balanced and that it disproportionally targets the Government of 
National Accord. After the incident with the interception of the Turkish vessel by Operation 
IRINI, the EU and Turkey established a clear line of communication to prevent potential 
miscommunication. 
The EU listed a Turkish shipping company in the framework of violations of the Libya 
weapons embargo.  
Turkey remained committed to the political process in Syria and engaged with Russia and 
Iran in the framework of the Astana Process, complementing the Geneva Process. Turkey 
actively supported the work of the Constitutional Committee and continued to lend support 
and assistance to the opposition. One year after the Syrian regime’s latest large-scale 
offensive on Idlib, the cease-fire agreed in March 2020 between Turkey and Russia held 
during the reporting period, although cease-fire violations and military flare-ups regularly 
took place. Turkish troops significantly reinforced their military presence in the region. 
Turkey started dismantling certain military observation posts, which were encircled by Syrian 
regime forces. Since August 2020, joint Turkish-Russian patrols in Idlib on the M4 highway 
no longer took place due to Russian safety concerns for its troops. The presence of radical 
elements in Idlib made for a complex picture on the ground. 
Since Operation Peace Spring in October 2019, Turkey and the opposition forces it backs 
kept control of the area between Tel Abyad and Ras al-Ayn, going 30 kilometres deep into 
the Syrian territory. The situation in this region remained fragile. Turkish forces engaged in 
“retaliation operations” in northeast Syria, in a claimed reaction against infiltration attempts 
by Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF). Turkey attached no credibility to the intra-Kurdish 
dialogue in northeast Syria. 
Governors in Turkish provinces adjacent to Syria played a central role in building 
administrative capacities in Turkish-controlled northern Syria. Turkey developed housing and 
infrastructure in the regions it controlled, linking them to those of Turkey; it also provided 
basic services to the local population. However, the human rights situation in northern Syria 
under the control of Turkish forces and Turkey-affiliated armed groups remained a matter of 
concern. The Turkish authorities supported activities conducted by the Syrian Interim 
Government to bring back stability and create administrative structures on the ground. 
Despite efforts being made, as an occupying power Turkey needs to continue to address the 
human rights issue. Turkey cooperated with the United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees.  
Turkey maintained close relations with Iraq and various high-level meetings took place. 
Turkey also maintained good relations with the authorities of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq. 
Turkey continued its anti-terrorism operations in the Iraqi territory, in particular against the 
PKK groups and entities involved in acts of terrorism. The recrudescence of such operations 
in April and May 2021 was criticised by the government of Iraq. Turkey welcomed the Al 
Ula Declaration ending the dispute among the members of the Gulf Cooperation Council. 
Turkey had an intensive cooperation, including a military base with Qatar, which is also 


===== PAGE 120 =====
 
118 
 
engaged financially in Turkey. The relations with the Kingdom of South Arabia improved, 
despite the case of the Kashoggi murder, while the relations with the United Arab Emirates 
remained tense.  
Turkey supported the safeguarding of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on Iran and 
acknowledged the EU initiatives on the matter. Turkey maintained a high-level dialogue with 
Iran. Some tensions with Iran could be noticed in the context of the Syrian and north-Iraqi 
theatres. 
Turkey and Russia further developed their bilateral cooperation in a range of areas, including 
cooperation on defence, economy, energy, tourism and culture. They maintained an intensive 
involvement in, and coordination on regional conflicts in Syria, Libya and Nagorno-
Karabakh, despite providing political and military support to opposing parties. Turkish and 
Russian leaders spoke regularly. Turkey also coordinated with Russia to water down the 
NATO response to the forced diversion of an EU plane over Belarus. 
Relations with Ukraine further developed, with the Ukrainian President’s visit in Turkey in 
April 2021, notably in the areas of defence and aerospace as well as tourism. Turkey 
continued to stand on Ukraine's side regarding Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea and 
support to the "rebels" in the Donbass region. 
Regarding the South Caucasus countries, Turkey focused its cooperation on energy, 
including TANAP and the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline, as well as connectivity. The Vice 
Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Georgia visited Turkey in March 2021. 
Turkey considered that bilateral issues between Georgia and Russia could be better addressed 
in a multilateral platform. Turkey took a leading role in supporting Azerbaijan military 
efforts in Nagorno-Karabakh, providing military assistance, intelligence and weapons, and 
reportedly support through foreign fighters. As a consequence, relations with Armenia did 
not improve.  
The “Asia Anew” initiative announced by Turkey’s Foreign Minister in August 2019 seeks 
to diversify Turkey’s diplomatic relations and enhance its ties with the continent. Joint 
projects with ASEAN were further developed, including on tourism, science and technology, 
higher education, disaster response and demining. 
Turkey and China continued working together to align Turkey's Middle Corridor 
infrastructure strategy with China's Belt and Road Initiative. Chinese financial investments 
into Turkey increased. A direct train link between the two countries was inaugurated. In 
December 2020, China ratified the bilateral extradition agreement with Turkey. The 
ratification of the agreement by Turkey was pending. Turkey further developed its 
cooperation with Indonesia in the defence industry area. Turkey and Japan made no 
progress in negotiations for an economic partnership deal. Turkey’s Foreign Minister visited 
Pakistan in January 2021 and inaugurated a new Consulate General in Karachi. He visited 
Bangladesh and Indonesia in December 2020, aiming to increase cooperation in the fields of 
economy and defence industry. 
Turkey invested further into the relations with the Turkic-speaking Kazakhstan, 
Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, and Kyrgyzstan focusing on trade, connectivity and energy. 
The Turkish Foreign Minister visited Tajikistan in March 2021 to attend the 9th Ministerial 
Conference of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process. The latter platform focuses on 
Afghanistan, where Turkey seeks to play a key role in the Taliban-led country and maintain 
its presence in Kabul.  


===== PAGE 121 =====
 
119 
 
5. 
ANNEX I – RELATIONS BETWEEN THE EU AND TURKEY 
Within the framework of accession negotiations, 16 chapters have been opened so far and 
one of these was provisionally closed. In June 2019, the General Affairs Council reiterated the 
Council’s position of June 2018 that Turkey has been moving further away from the European 
Union. Turkey's accession negotiations have therefore effectively come to a standstill and no 
further chapters can be considered for opening or closing. The EU Leaders confirmed that 
dialogue on rule of law and fundamental rights remains an integral part of the EU-Turkey 
relationship. 
The Council conclusions of July 2019, adopted in response to Turkey’s provocative actions in 
the Eastern Mediterranean, remain valid. The Council decided to suspend negotiations with 
Turkey on the Comprehensive Air Transport Agreement, not to hold for the time being the 
EU-Turkey Association Council as well as further meetings of the EU-Turkey high-level 
dialogues, to endorse the Commission’s proposal to reduce the pre-accession assistance to 
Turkey for 2020, and to invite the European Investment Bank to review its lending activities 
in Turkey, notably with regard to sovereign-backed lending. The EU extended the existing 
framework for restrictive measures in response to Turkey’s unauthorised drilling activities in 
the Eastern Mediterranean. Two Turkish individuals remain on the list of designations under 
this sanctions framework. The EU also listed a Turkish shipping company in the framework 
of violations of the Libya weapons embargo.  
The European Council repeatedly stated that the EU has a strategic interest in a stable and 
secure environment in the Eastern Mediterranean and in the development of a cooperative and 
mutually beneficial relationship with Turkey. The European Council of June 2021 welcomed 
the de-escalation in the Eastern Mediterranean, which needs to be sustained, and reiterated the 
EU’s readiness to engage with Turkey in a phased, proportionate and reversible manner to 
enhance cooperation in a number of areas of common interest, subject to the established 
conditionalities set out in March and in previous European Council conclusions. The October 
2020 European Council also stressed that in case of renewed unilateral actions or 
provocations in breach of international law, the EU will use all the instruments and the 
options at its disposal, including in accordance with Article 29 TEU and Article 215 TFEU, in 
order to defend its interests and those of its Member States.  
Reforms and developments in Turkey continued to be monitored by the bodies set up under 
the Association Agreement, with subcommittees kept being held throughout the reporting 
period. The Commission, jointly with the European External Action Service, has maintained 
EU-Turkey relations in all key areas of joint interest based on a broad engagement. In 
December 2020, the President of the European Council and the President of Turkey held a 
telephone call, followed by contacts at Presidential and Ministerial level. In April 2021, the 
Presidents of the European Council and of the European Commission met with the President 
of Turkey in Ankara. The High Representative/Vice President met his Turkish counterpart on 
several occasions. The political dialogue took place at senior officials level. 
Turkey remains the EU’s sixth largest trading partner, while the EU is Turkey’s largest. 
Two out of five goods traded by Turkey come from or go to the EU and a significant part of 
foreign direct investment in Turkey originates in the EU. As part of the Economic Reform 
Programme exercise, Turkey participated in the multilateral economic dialogue with the 
Commission and Member States held in July 2021 to prepare the country for participation in 
multilateral surveillance and economic policy coordination as part of the EU’s Economic and 
Monetary Union. The EU and Turkey also continue to coordinate in the framework of the 
G-20.  


===== PAGE 122 =====
 
120 
 
Regarding the Customs Union, the Commission adopted a recommendation for opening of 
negotiations with Turkey on the modernisation of the Customs Union in December 2016. This 
recommendation has been forwarded to the Council where it has been under consideration, 
without prejudice to Member States' position. In March 2021, the EU Leaders invited the 
Commission to intensify talks with Turkey to address current difficulties in the 
implementation of the Customs Union, ensuring its effective application to all Member States, 
and invited in parallel the Council to work on a mandate for the modernisation of the Customs 
Union. Such a mandate may be adopted by the Council subject to additional guidance by the 
European Council. The Commmision intensified the engagement with Turkey to discuss 
issues hampering the smooth functioning of the Customs Union, including in the framewok of 
the Customs Union Joint Committee in July 2021.  
In the area of visa, migration and asylum, the implementation of the March 2016 
EU-Turkey Statement has continued to deliver concrete results in reducing irregular and 
dangerous crossings on the Eastern Mediterranean Route to Europe and in saving lives at sea. 
Turkey sustained its considerable efforts to provide significant support to close to 4 million 
refugees, of which 3.7 million Syrians. In the context of the EU-Turkey visa liberalisation 
dialogue, no outstanding visa liberalisation benchmarks were fulfilled. The EU and Turkey 
continued negotiations, launched in November 2018, on an international agreement on the 
exchange of personal data between Europol and the Turkish authorities competent for fighting 
serious crime and terrorism.  
Turkey and the EU continued to have fruitful cooperation under the Facility for Refugees in 
Turkey. The Facility manages a total of EUR 6 billion. The full operational budget of the 
Facility was contracted by the end of 2020; disbursements have reached over EUR 4.2 billion 
in August 2021, with the balance to be disbursed in the course of implementation of Facility 
projects. Facility funding continued to support projects focused on humanitarian assistance, 
education, migration management, health, municipal infrastructure, and socio-economic 
support. In 2020 and 2021, EUR 585 million were earmarked from the EU budget for 
humanitarian support and the continuation of two important cash support programmes for 
refugees. In March 2021, the members of the European Council agreed that the assistance of 
the European Union for the refugees and host communities be continued. In June 2021, the 
Commission proposed to allocate EUR 3 billion in additional assistance to Syrian refugees 
and host communities in Turkey 
Regarding bilateral financial assistance, projects under the Instrument for Pre-accession 
Assistance (IPA) for Turkey continued to be implemented, in compliance with the guidance 
of the EU Budgetary Authority. Financial assistance under the IPA III will focus on priorities 
linked to the fundamental pillars of the enlargement strategyas well as on building more 
resilient and more sustainable economies and societies after the impact of the COVID-19 
pandemic. 
Turkey participates in the following EU programmes: Erasmus+, Horizon 2020, Customs 
2020, Fiscalis 2020, COSME (Competitiveness of Enterprises and Small and Medium-sized 
Enterprises) and EASI (Employment and Social Innovation). Since 2019 it has also 
participated in the European Solidarity Corps programme. Turkey participates in the 
European Environmental Agency, the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug 
Addiction and the Civil Protection Mechanism. 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 123 =====
 
 
STATISTICAL DATA (as of 09.09.2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Turkey 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Basic data 
Note 
2008 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Population (thousand) 
 
70 586 s 
77 696 s 
78 741 s 
79 815 s 
80 811 s 
82 004 s 
Total area of the country (km²) 
1) 
780 053 w 
780 077 w 
780 077 w 
780 077 w 
780 085 w 
780 085 w 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National accounts 
Note 
2008 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Gross domestic product (GDP) (million national currency) 
 
1 002 757 
2 350 941 
2 626 560 
3 133 704 
3 758 316 
4 320 191 
Gross domestic product (GDP) (million euro) 
 
525 995 
777 042 
785 619 
760 497 
658 464 
679 510 
GDP (euro per capita) 
 
7 400 
9 930 
9 910 
9 470 
8 090 
8 230 
GDP per capita (in purchasing power standards (PPS)) 
 
12 680 
19 440 
19 080 
19 720 
19 530 
18 940 
GDP per capita (in PPS), relative to the EU average (EU-27 = 100) 
 
49.3 
67.6 
65.8 
66.1 
63.3 
59.3 
Real GDP growth rate: change on previous year of GDP volume (%) 
 
0.8 
6.1 
3.3 
7.5 
3.0 
0.9 
Employment growth (national accounts data), relative to the previous year (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Labour productivity growth: growth in GDP (in volume) per person employed, relative to the 
previous year (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Unit labour cost growth, relative to the previous year (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
**3 year change (T/T-3) in the nominal unit labour cost growth index (2015 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Labour productivity per person employed: GDP (in PPS) per person employed relative to EU 
average (EU-27 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Gross value added by main sectors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries (%) 
 
8.3 
7.8 
7.0 
6.8 
6.4 
7.1 
Industry (%) 
 
21.7 
22.4 
22.2 
23.3 
24.9 
24.2 
Construction (%) 
 
7.6 
9.2 
9.6 
9.6 
7.9 
6.0 
Services (%) 
 
62.3 s 
60.7 s 
61.2 s 
60.3 s 
60.7 s 
62.8 s 
Final consumption expenditure, as a share of GDP (%) 
 
74.7 
73.8 
74.1 
73.0 
70.9 
72.4 
Gross fixed capital formation, as a share of GDP (%) 
 
26.7 
29.6 
29.1 
29.9 
29.7 
25.9 
Changes in inventories, as a share of GDP (%) 
 
2.1 
-  1.4 
-  1.1 
0.8 
-  0.4 
-  1.1 
Exports of goods and services, relative to GDP (%) 
 
23.6 
24.5 
23.1 
26.0 
31.2 
32.7 
Imports of goods and services, relative to GDP (%) 
 
27.0 
26.6 
25.2 
29.7 
31.3 
29.9 
Gross fixed capital formation by the general government sector, as a percentage of GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business 
Note 
2008 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Industrial production volume index (2015 = 100) 
 
68.8 
100.0 
103.4 
112.7 
114.2 
113.6 
Number of active enterprises (number) 
 
: 
2 941 233 w 
2 981 381 w 
3 100 412 w 
3 160 371 w 
3 228 421 w 
Birth rate: number of enterprise births in the reference period (t) divided by the number of 
enterprises active in t (%) 
 
: 
12.9 
13.0 
14.1 
13.3 
12.9 w 
Death rate: number of enterprise deaths in the reference period (t) divided by the number of 
enterprises active in t (%) 
 
: 
11.4 
11.2 
12.1 
: 
: 


===== PAGE 124 =====
 
 
People employed in SMEs as a share of all persons employed (within the non-financial 
business economy) (%) 
 
: 
75.1 sw 
74.6 sw 
74.2 sw 
: 
: 
Value added by SMEs (in the non-financial business economy) (EUR million) 
 
: 
124 863 sw 
130 934 sw 
127 683 sw 
106 199 sw 
110 591 sw 
Total value added (in the non-financial business economy) (EUR million) 
 
: 
228 309 w 
241 711 w 
236 088 w 
202 005 w 
208 171 w 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inflation rate and house prices 
Note 
2008 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Consumer price index (CPI), change relative to the previous year (%) 
 
10.4 d 
7.7 d 
7.7 d 
11.1 d 
16.3 d 
15.2 d 
**Annual change in the deflated house price index (2015 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Balance of payments 
Note 
2008 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Balance of payments: current account total (million euro) 
2) 
- 26 805.1 w 
- 28 986.2 
- 24 218.4 
- 35 995.3 
- 17 588.5 
6 087.2 
Balance of payments current account: trade balance (million euro) 
2) 
- 35 978.4 w 
- 43 375.6 
- 36 013.9 
- 51 370.2 
- 33 861.9 
- 15 000.2 
Balance of payments current account: net services (million euro) 
2) 
12 855.6 w 
21 856.4 
18 511.9 
22 968.3 
25 774.4 
31 826.1 
Balance of payments current account: net balance for primary income (million euro) 
2) 
- 5 168.6 w 
- 8 768.7 
- 8 289.2 
- 9 811.8 
- 10 153.0 
- 11 484.5 
Balance of payments current account: net balance for secondary income (million euro) 
2) 
1 486.3 w 
1 301.7 
1 572.8 
2 218.4 
651.9 
745.8 
Net balance for primary and secondary income: of which government transfers (million euro) 
 
: 
465.6 
1 009.3 
1 644.7 
223.5 
547.5 
**3 year backward moving average of the current account balance relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
-  5.0 
-  3.8 
-  3.8 
-  3.5 
-  2.2 
**Five year change in share of world exports of goods and services (%) 
 
: 
11.8 
16.6 
6.9 
5.8 
7.6 
Net balance (inward - outward) of foreign direct investment (FDI) (million euro) 
2) 3) 
11 763.7 w 
12 768.8 w 
9 748.8 w 
7 433.8 w 
7 937.3 w 
5 473.9 w 
Foreign direct investment (FDI) abroad (million euro) 
2) 3) 
- 1 733.1 w 
4 337.0 
2 517.4 
2 321.7 
3 054.2 
2 618.7 
of which FDI of the reporting economy in the EU-27 countries (million euro) 
2) 3) 
: 
- 1 837.2 w 
-  972.9 w 
713.8 
1 718.2 
- 1 240.3 w 
Foreign direct investment (FDI) in the reporting economy (million euro) 
2) 3) 
13 496.7 w 
17 103.2 w 
12 417.6 w 
9 754.8 w 
10 991.5 w 
8 095.6 w 
of which FDI of the EU-27 countries in the reporting economy (million euro) 
2) 3) 
: 
8 078.3 w 
3 872.4 w 
2 555.0 
3 143.6 
663.1 
**Net international investment position, relative to GDP (%) 
 
-  25.8 w 
-  44.2 w 
-  42.3 w 
-  53.7 w 
-  46.3 w 
-  45.4 w 
Year on year rate of change in gross inflow of remittances (in national currency) from migrant 
workers (%) 
4) 
17.7 sw 
6.2 sw 
-  10.8 sw 
-  13.3 sw 
: 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Public finance 
Note 
2008 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
General government deficit / surplus, relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
0.5 w 
-  1.3 w 
-  2.8 w 
-  2.9 w 
-  4.5 w 
General government gross debt relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
27.4 w 
28.0 w 
28.0 w 
30.2 w 
32.6 w 
Total  government revenues, as a percentage of GDP (%) 
 
: 
32.2 w 
32.5 w 
31.2 w 
31.8 w 
31.0 w 
Total government expenditure, as a percentage of GDP (%) 
 
: 
31.7 w 
33.8 w 
34.0 w 
34.7 w 
35.4 w 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Financial indicators 
Note 
2008 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Gross external debt of the whole economy, relative to GDP (%) 
5) 
36.6 sw 
46.7 sw 
47.4 sw 
53.4 sw 
: 
: 
Gross external debt of the whole economy, relative to total exports (%) 
 
157.7 w 
189.7 w 
205.0 w 
203.7 w 
186.4 w 
176.7 w 
Money supply: M1 (banknotes, coins, overnight deposits, million euro) 
 
39 927.2 w 
98 076.2 w 
103 610.0 w 
99 085.3 w 
84 551.1 w 
108 082.9 w 
Money supply: M2 (M1 plus deposits with maturity up to two years, million euro) 
 
203 839.8 w 
374 337.2 w 
380 863.3 w 
357 979.4 w 
321 665.1 w 
367 703.2 w 
Money supply: M3 (M2 plus marketable instruments, million euro) 
 
214 472.6 w 
387 803.0 w 
393 176.4 w 
370 812.2 w 
330 904.3 w 
384 031.8 w 
Total credit by monetary financial institutions to residents (consolidated) (million euro) 
6) 
131 876.4 w 
396 277.9 
410 574.0 
377 902.8 
349 175.5 
406 046.7 
**Annual change in financial sector liabilities (%) 
 
: 
14.4 
17.0 
20.8 
17.6 
18.9 


===== PAGE 125 =====
 
 
**Private credit flow, consolidated, relative to GDP (%) 
7) 
: 
10.9 w 
7.1 w 
9.1 w 
2.3 w 
3.3 w 
**Private debt, consolidated, relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
79 
84 
84 
82 
80 
Interest rates: day-to-day money rate, per annum (%) 
 
16.09 
10.70 
9.32 
11.58 
17.76 
20.52 
Lending interest rate (one year), per annum (%) 
 
23.21 w 
16.85 w 
15.79 w 
18.12 w 
28.89 w 
15.82 w 
Deposit interest rate (one year), per annum (%) 
8) 
19.12 w 
10.72 w 
10.33 w 
13.53 w 
22.31 w 
14.56 w 
Euro exchange rates: average of period (1 euro = … national currency) 
 
1.906 
3.026 
3.343 
4.121 
5.708 
6.358 
Trade-weighted effective exchange rate index, 42 countries (2010 = 100) 
 
106 
65 
60 
50 
36 
32 
**3 year change (T/T-3) in the trade-weighted effective exchange rate index, 42 countries 
(2010 = 100) 
 
-8.8 sw 
-23.3 sw 
-29.1 sw 
-44.2 sw 
-46.3 sw 
-47.0 sw 
Value of reserve assets (including gold) (million euro) 
2) 
50 485.5 w 
99 624.2 w 
95 863.2 w 
95 361.6 w 
78 770.5 w 
94 413.6 w 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
External trade in goods 
Note 
2008 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Value of imports: all goods, all partners (million euro) 
 
136 441 
186 536 
179 468 
207 000 
188 337 
181 038 
Value of exports: all goods, all partners (million euro) 
 
89 557 
129 555 
128 792 
139 229 
142 290 
153 201 
Trade balance: all goods, all partners (million euro) 
 
- 46 884 
- 56 981 
- 50 676 
- 67 771 
- 46 047 
- 27 836 
Terms of trade (export price index / import price index * 100) (number) 
9) 
100.5 sw 
107.1 sw 
111.2 sw 
105.0 sw 
102.3 sw 
102.7 sw 
Share of exports to EU-27 countries in value of total exports (%) 
 
42.0 s 
37.2 s 
39.7 s 
40.9 s 
43.3 s 
42.2 s 
Share of imports from EU-27 countries in value of total imports (%) 
 
34.4 s 
35.3 s 
36.3 s 
33.6 s 
32.9 s 
31.6 s 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Demography 
Note 
2008 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Crude rate of natural change of population (natural growth rate): number of births minus 
deaths (per thousand inhabitants) 
 
12.7 
11.8 
11.2 
10.8 
10.1 
9.1 
Infant mortality rate deaths of children under one year of age (per thousand live births) 
 
15.7 
10.7 
10.0 
9.2 
9.3 
9.1 
Life expectancy at birth: male (years) 
 
: 
75.4 
75.4 
75.7 
76.2 
76.4 
Life expectancy at birth: female (years) 
 
: 
81.0 
81.0 
81.3 
81.6 
81.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Labour market 
Note 
2008 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Economic activity rate for persons aged 20–64: proportion of the population aged 20–64 that 
is economically active (%) 
 
53.4 
59.9 
60.9 
61.9 
62.3 
62.2 
*Employment rate for persons aged 20–64: proportion of the population aged 20–64 that are 
in employment (%) 
 
48.4 
53.9 
54.4 
55.3 
55.6 
53.8 
Male employment rate for persons aged 20–64 (%) 
 
72.7 
75.3 
75.5 
76.1 
76.0 
73.2 
Female employment rate for persons aged 20–64 (%) 
 
24.9 
32.5 
33.2 
34.5 
35.2 
34.4 
Employment rate for persons aged 55–64: proportion of the population aged 55–64 that are 
in employment (%) 
 
27.5 
31.8 
33.4 
34.4 
35.3 
33.6 
Employment by main sectors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries (%) 
 
: 
20.4 s 
19.5 s 
19.4 s 
18.4 s 
18.1 s 
Industry (%) 
 
: 
20.1 s 
19.5 s 
19.1 s 
19.7 s 
19.8 s 
Construction (%) 
 
: 
7.2 s 
7.3 s 
7.4 s 
6.9 s 
5.5 s 
Services (%) 
 
: 
52.4 s 
53.7 s 
54.1 s 
54.9 s 
56.6 s 
People employed in the public sector as a share of total employment, persons aged 20–64 
(%) 
 
14.0 w 
13.5 w 
13.8 w 
13.3 w 
15.4 w 
16.8 w 


===== PAGE 126 =====
 
 
People employed in the private sector as a share of total employment, persons aged 20–64 
(%) 
 
86.0 w 
86.5 w 
86.2 w 
86.7 w 
84.6 w 
83.2 w 
Unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force that is unemployed (%) 
 
9.8 
10.3 
10.9 
10.9 
10.9 
13.7 
Male unemployment rate (%) 
 
9.7 
9.2 
9.6 
9.4 
9.6 
12.4 
Female unemployment rate (%) 
 
10.0 
12.6 
13.7 
13.9 
13.8 
16.5 
Youth unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force aged 15–24 that is unemployed (%) 
 
18.5 
18.5 
19.5 
20.5 
20.2 
25.2 
Long-term unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force that has been unemployed for 
12 months or more (%) 
 
2.6 w 
2.2 
2.2 
2.4 
2.4 
3.2 
Unemployment rate for persons (aged 25–64) having completed at most lower secondary 
education (ISCED levels 0-2) (%) 
 
8.3 
8.9 
9.1 
8.9 
9.1 
12.3 
Unemployment rate for persons (aged 25–64) having completed tertiary education (ISCED 
levels 5-8) (%) 
 
6.5 
8.3 
9.3 
9.4 
9.8 
10.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social cohesion 
Note 
2008 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Average nominal monthly wages and salaries (national currency) 
10) 
956 w 
1 828 w 
2 031 w 
2 287 w 
2 509 w 
2 857 w 
Index of real wages and salaries (index of nominal wages and salaries divided by the 
inflation index) (2016 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
GINI coefficient 
 
43 
42 
43 
43 
43 
42 
Poverty gap 
 
30.0 
27.8 
26.6 
26.4 
25.8 
27.4 
*Early leavers from education and training: proportion of the population aged 18–24 with at 
most lower secondary education who are not in further education or training (%) 
 
45.5 
36.4 
34.3 
32.5 
31.0 
28.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Standard of living 
Note 
2008 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Number of passenger cars relative to population size (number per thousand population) 
 
95.0 
134.0 
142.0 
149.0 
151.0 
150.0 
Number of mobile phone subscriptions relative to population size (number per thousand 
population) 
 
920.0 bw 
935.2 w 
940.4 w 
964.0 w 
977.0 w 
972.0 w 
Mobile broadband penetration (per 100 inhabitants) 
 
0.0 w 
49.7 w 
64.8 w 
70.5 w 
74.5 w 
75.0 w 
Fixed broadband penetration (per 100 inhabitants) 
 
8 w 
12 w 
13 w 
15 w 
16 w 
17 w 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Infrastructure 
Note 
2008 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Density of railway network (lines in operation per thousand km²) 
11) 
11.2 sw 
13.0 ds 
13.0 ds 
13.1 ds 
13.2 ds 
13.3 s 
Length of motorways (kilometres) 
 
1 922 
2 282 
2 542 
2 657 
2 842 
3 060 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Innovation and research 
Note 
2008 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Public expenditure on education relative to GDP (%) 
 
: 
: 
4.7 
4.4 
4.3 
: 
*Gross domestic expenditure on R&D relative to GDP (%) 
 
0.69 
0.88 
0.94 
0.95 
1.03 
1.06 
Government budget appropriations or outlays on R&D (GBAORD), as a percentage of GDP 
(%) 
 
0.27 
0.34 
0.35 
0.34 
0.35 
0.35 
Percentage of households who have internet access at home (%) 
 
25.0 
70.0 
76.0 
81.0 
84.0 
88.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environment 
Note 
2008 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
*Index of greenhouse gas emissions,  CO2 equivalent (1990 = 100) 
 
176.7 w 
215.4 w 
226.9 w 
238.8 w 
237.5 w 
: 


===== PAGE 127 =====
 
 
Energy intensity of the economy (kg of oil equivalent per 1 000 euro GDP at 2015 constant 
prices) 
 
187.2 
171.4 
175.0 
175.3 
167.7 
168.4 
Electricity generated from renewable sources relative to gross electricity consumption (%) 
 
17.4 w 
31.5 w 
32.3 w 
29.4 w 
32.2 w 
43.6 w 
Road share of inland freight transport (based on tonne-km) (%) 
 
94.4 w 
95.9 w 
95.6 w 
95.4 w 
94.8 w 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Energy 
Note 
2008 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Primary production of all energy products (thousand TOE) 
 
28 661 
31 459 
35 705 
36 466 
39 909 
45 134 
Primary production of crude oil (thousand TOE) 
 
2 134 
2 657 
2 721 
2 695 
3 010 
3 102 
Primary production of solid fuels (thousand TOE) 
 
16 373 
12 798 
15 498 
15 682 
16 547 
17 429 
Primary production of gas (thousand TOE) 
 
838 
314 
302 
292 
351 
390 
Net imports of all energy products (thousand TOE) 
 
72 480 s 
103 741 s 
106 071 s 
116 755 s 
109 980 s 
105 649 s 
Gross inland energy consumption (thousand TOE) 
 
99 480 
132 361 
139 634 
150 445 
148 120 
150 123 
Gross electricity generation (GWh) 
 
198 354 
261 288 
273 694 
296 429 
303 852 
302 796 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture 
Note 
2008 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Agricultural production volume index of goods and services (at producer prices) (2010 = 100) 
 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
Utilised agricultural area (thousand hectares) 
 
39 095.0 
38 551.0 
38 328.0 
38 120.0 
38 239.0 
37 712.0 
Livestock numbers: live bovine animals (thousand heads, end of period) 
12) 
10 859.9 w 
14 127.8 
14 222.2 p 
16 105.0 p 
17 220.9 p 
17 872.3 w 
Livestock numbers: live swine (thousand heads, end of period) 
 
1.7 w 
1.6 w 
1.3 w 
1.4 w 
1.6 w 
1.4 w 
Livestock numbers: live sheep and live goats (thousand heads, end of period) 
 
29 568.2 sw 
41 924.1 s 
41 329.2 ps 
44 312.3 s 
46 117.4 sw 
48 481.5 sw 
Raw milk available on farms (thousand tonnes) 
 
12 243.0 w 
18 654.7 w 
18 489.2 w 
20 699.9 w 
22 120.7 w 
22 960.4 w 
Harvested crop production: cereals (including rice) (thousand tonnes) 
 
29 287.0 
38 637.0 
35 724.9 
36 598.8 
34 705.8 
35 202.1 
Harvested crop production: sugar beet (thousand tonnes) 
 
15 488.0 
16 023.0 
19 465.0 
21 149.0 
18 900.0 
18 055.0 
Harvested crop production: vegetables (thousand tonnes) 
 
27 259.0 
29 552.0 
30 267.0 
30 826.0 
29 987.0 
31 041.0 
 
Source: Eurostat and the statistical authorities in Turkey 
 
 
: = not available 
 
b = break in series 
 
d =  definition differs 
 
p = provisional 
 
s = Eurostat estimate 
 
w = data supplied by and under the responsibility of the national statistical authority and published on an "as is" basis and without any assurance as regards 
their quality and adherence to EU statistical methodology 
 
* = Europe 2020 indicator 
 
** = Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure (MIP) indicator 
 
 
 
Footnotes: 
1) 
Area values are calculated by reference to corine classifications and adapted to LUCAS. 
2) 
Average of year exchange rate used to convert to euros. 
3) 
Based on BPM5. 
4) 
End of year exchange rate used to convert to Turkish Lira. 
5) 
End of year exchange rate used to convert to euros. 


===== PAGE 128 =====
 
 
6) 
The exchange rate is the Central Bank buying rate at the end of the year.  Data cover loans granted by MFIs to residents. Participation Banks and 
Investment and Development Banks are included. 
7) 
Data cover debt securities and loans. 
8) 
Average of monthly data. Overnight deposit facility. 
9) 
Indices are calculated with Fisher index formula and are 2010=100 
10) 
Source: Income and Living Conditions Survey. 
11) 
Main lines only. 
Area values are calculated by reference to corine classifications and adapted to LUCAS. 
12) 
Excluding buffaloes. 
 
 
 
 
