3 
 
1. INTRODUCTION1 
1.1. CONTEXT 
Following the first Intergovernmental Conference on accession negotiations on 19 July 2022, 
the screening sessions for all six clusters were completed on 24 November 2023. In the context 
of accession negotiations, Albania submitted the three roadmaps that will guide its reforms 
efforts. Albania continued to implement the Stabilisation and Association Agreement, and the 
joint bodies under the agreement met. An intergovernmental conference was convened in 
October 2024 to open accession negotiations on cluster 1 – fundamentals.  
The firm political commitment of the Albanian authorities to the strategic goal of European 
Union integration has been consistently stated as the country’s key priority, and a high level of 
ambition to move forward in the accession negotiations has been generally maintained. The 
ongoing accession negotiation process needs to lead to an acceleration of EU-related reforms. 
Albania maintained its record of full alignment with the EU’s common foreign and security 
policy. During its term as a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council between 2022 
and 2023, Albania actively engaged as a co-penholder of resolutions condemning Russia’s war 
of aggression against Ukraine, aligning with the EU position, including on restrictive measures 
and sanctions against Russia. Albania’s stance sends a strong signal of its strategic choice of 
EU accession and of its role as a reliable partner. 
Albania has actively engaged in the implementation of the new Growth Plan for the Western 
Balkans across the four pillars of gradual integration with the EU single market, regional 
economic integration, fundamental reforms and increased financial support. The Reform 
Agenda covers reforms in the areas of: (i) business environment; (ii) human capital; (iii) 
digitalisation; (iv) energy and green transition; and (v) fundamental rights and the rule of law. 
The Commission’s 2024 rule of law report2 covered Albania for the first time.  
 
1.2. MAIN FINDINGS OF THE REPORT3 
 CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
Democracy  
The electoral framework is conducive for organising democratic elections. Parliament adopted 
amendments to the Electoral Code. However, there has been limited progress in addressing 
 
1  is presented in a renewed format and structure. Main findings of the report, together with the 
recommendations (previously grey assessment boxes) are brought together at the beginning of the report. 
Furthermore, under the fundamentals cluster, for better readability and comparability across all reports, certain data 
is provided (also) in the form of graphs. 
2 COM(2024)800 final 
3 This report covers the period from 15 June 2023 to 1 September 2024. It is based on input from a variety of 
sources, including contributions from the government of Albania, EU Member States, European Parliament reports 
and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also includes the results of 
comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of law. 
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of preparation, 
moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made during the reporting 
period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, good progress and very 
good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been used. 
 
4 
 
outstanding recommendations from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe 
(OSCE)/Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) and the Venice 
Commission, as the mandate of Parliament’s ad-hoc committee on electoral reform expired 
without any results.  
Parliament can exercise its powers in a mostly satisfactory way. However, its oversight over the 
executive remains limited. Parliament’s activity was affected by continuous clashes between 
the ruling majority and a part of the opposition between October 2023 and March 2024. These 
reflected a lack of constructive and inclusive political dialogue and resulted in opposition MPs 
causing disruptions due to alleged restrictions on their rights. Despite the welcome return to the 
normal functioning of Parliament in March 2024, political polarisation remains high. This 
continues to negatively impact Parliament’s key legislative and oversight roles and extends 
delays in appointing individuals to key positions.  
Albania’s bodies in charge of the integration process are in place. These EU integration 
structures were further consolidated and successfully completed the screening process in 
November 2023. EU integration expertise, planning and interinstitutional mechanisms will need 
to be strengthened to be able to cope with the EU accession process. The government needs to 
intensify its efforts to engage in public communication on EU integration. 
The government continued to show its commitment to EU integration. Three waves of 
governmental changes occurred during the reporting period. A new major reform process on 
‘good governance, rule of law and anti-corruption for Albania 2030’ was launched by Parliament, 
at the behest of the Prime Minister, yet without cross-party support. The government continued 
to adopt policies and laws raising concerns regarding the respect of EU standards. The division 
of responsibilities between local and central government remains a concern. Efforts are still 
needed to improve local government units’ financial resources, administrative capacity and 
fiscal autonomy. 
Civil society organisations (CSOs) in Albania operate in a challenging environment, including in 
relation to registration requirements and limited public funding for CSOs. The role of civil 
society, including in the EU accession negotiation process, should be further strengthened. The 
structures in place for consulting civil society need to be reinforced and become fully 
operational. In addition, the conditions necessary for effective VAT exemption need to be put in 
place without further delay. 
Public administration reform  
Albania remains moderately prepared in the area of public administration reform (PAR). It made 
limited progress in delivering on last year’s recommendations. A new position of Minister of 
State for Public Administration and Anti-Corruption was created in January 2024, which 
provides a clear political leadership for the PAR agenda and should improve the overall 
coordination of the reform efforts. The new Public Financial Management (PFM) Strategy for 
the period 2023-2030 was adopted in June 2024, and a new National Anti-Fraud strategy will be 
adopted by end 2024. In order to step up the efforts, further anticorruption reforms will feature 
in the Reform Agenda.The development of the public administration reform (PAR) and anti-
corruption strategies continued, but adoption is still pending.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should, in particular: 
 
5 
 
→ adopt and start implementing the new public administration and anti-corruption strategies, 
and review the effectiveness of the current monitoring structures; start the implementation 
of the new 2023-2030 PFM strategy; significantly limit the use of the normative acts for 
budget revisions; and pursue a return to regular budget revision processes; 
→ consistently and effectively implement the provisions on merit-based recruitment, 
promotion and dismissal in the civil service law at all levels, especially at senior level, and 
begin automating the payroll system again; 
→ put in place a legislative framework that properly regulates the typology and criteria for 
establishing subordinated bodies and clarified lines of accountability. 
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights  
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of judiciary and fundamental rights and has made 
some progress during the reporting period. 
Functioning of the judiciary  
Albania is moderately prepared and has made some progress on the functioning of the 
judiciary. Albania continued implementing the justice reform and the vetting process, which led 
to significant improvements in the functioning of the judiciary that must be maintained. The end 
of the vetting process in first instance is imminent, which is a major milestone with 11 
remaining cases out of 805 as of 3 October 2024. Concerns remain about attempted political 
interference and pressure on the judicial system and shortcomings in the merit-based 
appointments of non-magistrate members of the High Judicial Council (HJC) and the High 
Prosecutorial Council (HPC) and their integrity. The new judicial map was implemented, but 
there are still challenges with the quality and efficiency of justice. Some preparatory acts were 
adopted on the roll-out of an integrated case management system, but the necessary budget 
allocations are lacking, especially for the court component. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ further strengthen accountability by: (i) speeding up vetting procedures in appeal; (ii) 
speeding up evaluations of magistrates and implementing conflict-of-interest regulations by 
the HJC and the HPC; (iii) aligning provisions applicable to the selection of non-magistrate 
members of HJC and HPC with those applicable to magistrates as regards asset 
declaration and background checks, ensuring the highest integrity and merit principles, and 
a high degree of consistency with the ranking of the ad-hoc pre-selection committee (iv) 
filling the magistrate-inspector vacancies at the High Justice Inspectorate; 
→ improve the quality of justice by making progress in filling vacancies for court chairs, 
magistrates and legal advisers at all levels of the judiciary and quality improvements at the 
School of Magistrates, in line with European standards, including the comprehensively 
revising the School of Magistrates’ entrance exam, increasing the relevance of training and 
ensuring quality and integrity of its staff; 
→ improve judicial efficiency by: (i) ensuring the necessary budget for the Integrated Case 
Management System and rolling it out in a timely manner; and (ii) enacting the HJC 
roadmap to increase efficiency and reduce the backlog in the judicial system. 
Fight against corruption  
 
6 
 
Albania is between having some level of preparation and a moderate level of preparation and 
has shown some progress. The continued implementation of vetting has had a positive impact 
on fight against corruption in the judiciary. The end of vetting of all judges and prosecutors is 
imminent at first instance with 794 cases closed out of 805 (98% of the total). Another direct 
outcome of vetting was registered in September 2024, as the IQC  referred 19 vetting cases with 
prima facie criminal elements to prosecution for further investigations, thus following up on a 
key recommendation from the EU. The Specialised Structure for Anti-Corruption and Organised 
Crime (SPAK) has continued to produce good results by further advancing in the prosecution 
and investigation of complex anti-corruption cases, including those involving high-level 
politicians and officials, as well as cases involving the protection of EU financial interests. 
SPAK’s capacity in financial investigations has increased and the systematic use of financial 
investigations and asset confiscations has improved. Overall, corruption remains a serious 
concern and preventive efforts have had a limited impact. The adoption of a broad criminal 
amnesty law led to 40 individuals convicted by SPAK courts and being fully pardoned and 65 
others having their sentence reduced, which raises concerns. Targeted risk assessments and 
dedicated measures are needed to address corruption in the most vulnerable sectors, including 
police, customs, land and property management, state cadastre and public procurement. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ strengthen the investigation, prosecution, adjudication and final conviction of corruption 
cases, in particular at high level, including the final confiscation of criminal assets resulting 
from corruption-related offences, and increase proactive referrals of relevant state 
institutions and law enforcement agencies to SPAK; 
→ adopt and effectively implement anti-corruption strategy and the accompanying action 
plans, including comprehensive risk assessments for vulnerable sectors, effectively 
implement integrity action plans in those state authorities most prone to corruption, such as 
the State Cadastre Agency and fully address the recommendations of the Council of 
Europe’s Group of States against Corruption (GRECO); 
→ make asset declaration checks more efficient by reviewing the administrative boundaries of 
the HIDAACI’s mandate and ensuring all asset declarations are published online. 
Fundamental rights  
Albania’s legal framework sets out a generally good basis for the protection of fundamental 
rights. Progress during the reporting period included the adoption of a new strategy for the 
protection of crime victims, as well as the preliminary results of the national population and 
housing census published in June. Implementation efforts need to intensify overall, particularly 
in the areas of violence against women, protection of property rights and rights of persons 
belonging to minorities.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ adopt the pending implementing legislation on the rights of persons belonging to minorities, 
specifically on self-identification and the use of minority languages, and increase the 
capacity of the State Committee on National Minorities; 
→ safeguard the right to property, in particular, by making decisive progress on first 
registration and compensation, improving the transparency of the state cadastre and the 
 
7 
 
quality of the property register cadastral data, and ensuring that the right to a fair trial and 
the right to effective remedy are respected in cases of expropriation and removal of 
properties; 
→ improve the protection of fundamental rights, in particular, by fully aligning the Law on 
personal data protection with the EU acquis enhancing institutional capacities on human 
rights (monitoring, data collection), and by effectively implementing the National Agenda on 
Child Rights, including by allocating sufficient budget to strengthen the capacity of the 
Agency on Child Rights and to help children facing exclusion and vulnerabilities, including 
those living in poverty, children with disabilities, children belonging to minorities and other 
children at risk. 
Freedom of expression  
Albania is between having some level of preparation and a moderate level of preparation in the 
area of freedom of expression and made no progress during the reporting period. Media 
independence and pluralism continued to be affected by the high market concentration, the 
overlap of business and political interests, the lack of transparency of financing sources, the 
high concentration of media ownership, intimidation and precarious working conditions for 
journalists. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ adopt amendments of legal framework to: (i) increase the transparency of media ownership,  
(ii) fully decriminalise defamation and align civil aspects of defamation with European 
standards, based on a structured and inclusive dialogue with media actors; 
→ ensure zero tolerance for intimidation and effective judicial follow-up of cases attacks 
against journalists; ensure increased capacities of law enforcement bodies to handle cases 
of violence, including on the margins of protests, and other criminal cases involving 
journalists, notably by ensuring high human rights compliance in handling incidents 
involving journalists, through binding instructions, data collection and capacity building 
measures; 
→ improve Albanian journalists’ working conditions, in particular by strengthening the 
protection of journalists’ employment and social rights and ensuring the labour code is 
consistently applied. 
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security  
Albania is moderately prepared in aligning with the EU acquis in the area of justice, freedom 
and security. Some progress was made in the fight against organised crime by increasing the 
capacity of the Specialised Anti-corruption and Organised Crime Structures (SPAK), improving 
the use of financial investigations and amending the legislation on psychoactive substances. 
Further action is needed to strengthen law enforcement capacity and improve the efficiency of 
investigations. Some progress was made in the area of migration with the adoption of the new 
migration strategy aligned with EU priorities. Further efforts are needed to improve access to 
asylum and align the country’s visa policy with the EU’s. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
 
8 
 
→ continue developing the systematic use of parallel financial investigations when dealing 
with serious and organised crime, illicit trafficking, terrorism and money laundering; 
→ adopt the legal framework to set up a national drugs observatory and a national early 
warning system on the detection of new psychoactive substances; 
→ improve the asylum referral system and access to asylum procedures, improve returns 
procedures, continue to address the issue of unfounded asylum applications in Schengen 
and associated countries and further align the country’s visa policy with the EU’s. 
Fight against organised crime 
Albania is between having some and a moderate level of preparation in aligning with the EU 
acquis in this area. Some progress was made in meeting last year’s recommendations by 
increasing SPAK’s capacity in financial investigations (with improved access to databases), 
strengthening the fight against money laundering and seizing assets linked to organised crime. 
Albania needs to continue working to ensure the independence of its law enforcement 
agencies. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ further strengthen the fight against organised crime, including through continued 
cooperation with EU Member States and EU agencies (including Europol, in the framework 
of the European Multidisciplinary Platform against Criminal Threats (EMPACT), and 
Eurojust), increase capacity to counter cybercrime and money laundering, and prevent and 
combat trafficking in human beings; 
→ set up an asset recovery office in charge of the identification and tracing of criminal assets 
in order to enhance the effectiveness of the national asset recovery system and facilitate 
the operational cooperation with Asset recovery offices in EU Member States without delay, 
in line with the EU acquis; 
→ improve criminal analysis systems and methodologies to resolve complex criminal cases. 
ECONOMIC CRITERIA 
The existence of a functioning market economy 
Albania has a good level of preparation  in developing a functioning market economy and made 
some progress in this area. Economic growth has been robust, helped by strong tourism and 
rising investments. Inflation continued to decline. Employment and activity rates increased, but 
unemployment remained relatively high, particularly among young people. Fiscal performance 
improved markedly with lower deficit and debt ratios. The financial sector remained stable, bank 
profitability increased while and credit growth expanded. However, financial intermediation 
remains low. A large informal economy impedes the business environment and competition.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
remain largely valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ revise the draft Medium-Term Revenue Strategy, including measures to increase tax revenue 
as a share of GDP, adopt it, and ensure its implementation;  
 
9 
 
→ improve fiscal risk analysis, including by building capacity in the related new Ministry of 
Finance department responsible for it, and publishing a comprehensive Fiscal Risk 
Statement;  
→ increase the transparency and accountability of state-owned enterprises, including by 
publishing their annual financial performance reports;  
→ facilitate the implementation of the national single project pipeline (NSPP), including by 
ranking the projects on the list; and advance the integration of public-private partnerships 
(PPPs) into the NSPP. 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the EU 
Albania has some level of preparation to cope with competitive pressure and market forces 
within the EU and made some progress in this area. Transport infrastructure improved, but 
infrastructure gaps remain, and digitalisation and education need further improvements. 
Exports of services (tourism) increased, but exports of goods remain well below their potential.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ continue to improve and better promoting the vocational education and training (VET) 
system in order to increase the graduates from VET schools and ensure that labour skills 
align with job market demands; 
→ improve the quality and inclusiveness of the education system and advance its digital 
transformation;  
→ strengthen digital infrastructure, including building cyber-resilience. 
Chapter 5: Public procurement 
Albania is moderately prepared in public procurement. Limited progress was made in the 
alignment of the legal framework for procurement, and there were concerns over newly 
introduced temporary exemption provisions in the public procurement law.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should, in particular: 
→ continue efforts to improve competitive procurement procedures;  
→ further align the legislative framework with the EU acquis in the area of concessions and 
public-private partnerships; 
→ ensure compliance with the EU acquis and the Stabilisation and Association Agreement 
(SAA) regarding intergovernmental agreements concluded with third countries in the area of 
procurement. 
Chapter 18: Statistics 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of statistics. Some progress was made by improving 
data transmission to Eurostat.  
The Commission’s recommendation from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
 
10 
 
→ publish detailed data and a thematic analysis of the population and housing census 
following the initial data release in June 2024 and conduct the census of agriculture 
holdings in line with the relevant EU acquis and international standards; 
→ reduce the staff turnover of the Institute for Statistics (INSTAT) and enhance improve 
cybersecurity;  
→ increase production and transmission of timely and high-quality data for dissemination by 
Eurostat and make government finance statistics (GFS) data publicly available. 
Chapter 32: Financial control  
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of financial control and partially aligned with the EU 
acquis. Limited progress was made during the reporting period. Public internal financial control 
(PIFC) needs to be further strengthened. Further efforts are required to ensure that the 
recommendations of the Supreme Audit Institution (ALSAI) are implemented and that its 
reporting is meaningfully assessed and used by Parliament.   
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ focus on further implementation of financial delegation and delegation of management 
responsibilities with a view to improve managerial accountability; 
→ monitor and follow-up the implementation of recommendations made in the annual public 
internal financial control (PIFC) report across budget institutions; increase parliamentary 
scrutiny of government bodies in their implementation of external audit recommendations, 
and improve reviews of and discussions on external audit reports;  
→ strengthen controls and consolidate capacities to protect EU financial interests, complete 
the delayed anti-fraud strategy and ensure the appropriate application of irregularities 
reporting.  
 
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET 
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods 
Albania is between having some level of preparation and a moderate level of preparation in the 
area of free movement of goods. There was some progress on alignment with the EU acquis on 
medical devices.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ complete the alignment of its legislation with the EU acquis relevant on the quality 
infrastructure, i.e. on accreditation, conformity assessment and market surveillance; 
→ significantly strengthen the enforcement capacity of the market surveillance inspectorate; 
→ finalise and adopt an action plan to comply with Articles 34-36 of the Treaty on the 
Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), fully covering the non-harmonised area, with a 
timeframe for screening all relevant legislation and practices and for introducing mutual 
recognition clauses or repealing and/or amending legislation and practices as necessary. 
 
11 
 
Chapter 2: Freedom of movement of workers 
Albania has some level of preparation in the freedom of movement for workers. Some progress 
was made on the implementation of ’s recommendation by concluding social 
security bilateral agreements with EU Member States and further advancing the preparations to 
enable connecting its employment services system to EURES.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ continue the development of the employment services IT system to enable its connection 
to EURES;  
→ strengthen the enforcement of the Law on foreigners as per the National Migration Strategy 
2024-2026; 
→ continue negotiating and concluding new bilateral agreements on social security, notably 
with EU Member States.  
Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services   
Albania is moderately prepared in the right of establishment and freedom to provide services. 
No progress was achieved in the reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ start amending the legislation to address the barriers to the freedom of establishment and 
free movement of services, which were identified in the 2023 self-screening exercise;  
→ continue efforts to align its legislation with the EU acquis and ensure appropriate institutional 
capacity in the area of mutual recognition of professional qualifications. 
Chapter 4: Free movement of capital  
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of free movement of capital. Some progress was 
made on alignment with the EU acquis on payments (Payment Account Directive) and on 
actions that resulted in Albania being delisted from the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) ‘grey 
list’ in October 2023, 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ ensure equal treatment of EU citizens and Albanian citizens on the acquisition of land, in line 
with Albania’s obligation under the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA); 
→ take actions to ensure the implementation of the provisions of the EU acquis on cross-border 
payments and interchange fees; 
→ Start implementation of the adopted 2024-2030 anti-money laundering and terrorism 
financing strategy and follow up on measures to address the 2023 National Risk 
Assessment. 
Chapter 6: Company law 
 
12 
 
Albania is moderately prepared in the field of company law. No progress was made in the 
reporting period.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ finalise the review of the existing legislation in the area of company law to identify 
amendments needed to complete alignment with the EU acquis, and make progress in 
introducing such amendments including on the use of digital tools, cross-border 
conversions, mergers and divisions, and on encouraging long-term shareholder 
engagement;  
→ further align the legal framework for accounting and audit with the latest EU acquis in these 
areas.  
Chapter 7: Intellectual property law 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of intellectual property rights. Some progress was 
made with the adoption of the implementing legislation on the procedure and fair compensation 
for the use of orphan works as well as the database of copyright works.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ complete alignment with the copyright and related rights acquis;  
→ continue to improve the functioning of collective management organisations (CMOs) and 
the payment of royalties to rights holders; 
→ further align legislation on industrial property rights and the IPR enforcement system 
leveraging collaboration with the European Union Intellectual Property Office.  
Chapter 8: Competition policy 
Albania is between having some level of preparation and a moderate level of preparation in 
competition policy. There was limited progress during the reporting period, including on 
legislative alignment with the EU acquis in the area of antitrust procedures.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ ensure the operational independence of the SAC and significantly increase the 
administrative capacity of the SAC’s secretariat; 
→ further align the legislative framework in the area of State aid with the EU acquis; 
→ step up efforts to raise awareness of line ministries and regional and local authorities’ 
awareness of State aid rules to ensure prior notification to SAC of aid measures and 
strengthen the enforcement of State aid rules. 
Chapter 9: Financial services 
Albania has between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of financial 
services. Some progress was made in the further alignment of legislation with the EU acquis on 
bank recovery and the resolution framework, and on private pension funds.  
 
13 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ continue the work towards full alignment of the banking regulation with the amended 
versions of the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD)/Regulation (CRR), the Bank Recovery 
and Resolution Directive (BRRD), and the deposit guarantee schemes Directive (DGS); 
→ complete alignment with the EU acquis on insurance, including the Solvency II Directive;  
→ complete alignment with the EU acquis on capital markets, including securities markets, 
investment funds and financial market infrastructures. 
Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection 
Preparations are at an early stage in the area of consumer and health protection. There was 
limited progress on alignment with the EU acquis on substances of human origin.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular:  
→ make progress on alignment of consumer law with the latest EU acquis to address 
developments in this area; 
→ complete alignment with the EU acquis on medicines for human and veterinary use, and on 
tobacco control; 
→ increase the financial and human resources in the health sector, specifically in primary 
healthcare and all-hazard health emergency preparedness, and guarantee equal access to 
quality health services for vulnerable populations, in particular for women and girls who 
belong to these groups. 
 
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH 
Chapter 10: Digital transformation and media 
Albania has between a moderate and a good level of preparation   in the field of digital 
transformation and media. Some progress was made on following up the recommendations of 
in last year’s report. The new Law on cybersecurity was adopted in February 2024, further 
aligning with the EU Directive on measures for a high common level of cybersecurity across the 
Union (NIS 2). In November 2023, Albania ratified the agreement joining the Digital Europe 
programme. In 2024, Albania set up the Broadband Competence Office (BCO) within the 
Ministry of Infrastructure and Energy structure. In May 2024, the new Law on electronic 
communications was adopted. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ complete the extension of rolling out the 112 emergency number to the whole country;  
→ implement the new Law on electronic communications and the new Law on cybersecurity and 
adopt the Cybersecurity Strategy Action Plan 2024-2026; 
→ improve the collection of statistical data on digital performance and digital competitiveness 
as per the Digital Economy and Society Index.  
 
14 
 
Chapter 16: Taxation 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of taxation. Limited progress was made in the 
reporting period, in particular, in abolishing the industrial incentive scheme. This resulted in 
Albania being removed from the list of potentially harmful tax regimes within the scope of the 
Forum on Harmful Tax Practices. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ adopt its MTRS (medium-term revenue strategy), including actions for the review and 
approach to further reducing tax exemptions and align VAT and excise duty rates with the 
EU acquis;  
→ simplify the taxation system to further encourage more tax compliance and improve the use 
of third-party data in the fight against tax fraud and tax evasion;  
→ start preparations towards achieving interconnection and interoperability with the common 
EU taxation IT systems. 
Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy   
Albania is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of economic and 
monetary policy and made some progress as the Bank of Albania maintained price stability, and 
the fiscal rule was adhered to complied with.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should, in particular: 
→ fully align the Law on the Bank of Albania with the EU acquis; 
→ begin reporting on the long-term fiscal sustainability of the social security system; 
→ align Albania’s budget legislation and practices with the requirements of the EU acquis. 
Chapter 19: Social policy and employment 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of social policy and employment and made some 
progress during the reporting period by starting the implementation of the National Strategy on 
Employment and Skills 2023-2030 and improving access to jobs through by the piloting of the 
Youth Guarantee. Albania adopted the 2024-2030 National social protection strategy. Efforts 
need to continue on strengthening the social protection system by increasing social services 
and strengthening the social dialogue, alongside the labour market measures.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should: 
 
→ adopt the new 2023-2030 strategy for occupational health and safety, with a focus on 
strengthening enforcement capacity, and the Child Guarantee action plan and establish an 
indexation mechanism of the Economic Aid benefits;  
→ roll out   the Youth Guarantee in more regions, taking extracting lessons learned from its 
pilot phase into account; 
 
15 
 
→ increase budget allocation, social services provision and monitoring of the Social Fund, 
strengthen the capacity of local governments to secure sufficient funding, and develop a 
coordinated social service referral system.  
Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy  
Albania has between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of enterprise and 
industrial policy and made some progress, in particular in the implementation of a support 
programme for innovation start-ups.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should, in particular:  
→ continue addressing the main challenges to the business environment by reducing the 
regulatory burden through fiscalisation measures, increasing the participation of businesses 
in funding programmes, reducing the informal economy and corruption, and increasing 
business support services by reviewing the Business and Investment Development Strategy;  
→ accelerate the full alignment of national legislation with the EU acquis on late payments; 
→ draft and adopt a unified investment law. 
Chapter 25: Science and research 
Albania has some level of preparation in the area of science and research. Some progress was 
made by strengthening innovation support measures, such as ensuring funding to the start-up 
fund, adopting the 2023-2030 national strategy on scientific research and innovation and 
finalising the entrepreneurial discovery process of the smart specialisation strategy. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ increase investment in research, in line with its own commitments and the new European 
Research Area priorities, and adopt the new Law on scientific research; 
→ adopt and implement the smart specialisation strategy; 
→ produce reliable statistics and data on innovation, science and technology. 
Chapter 26: Education and culture 
Albania is moderately prepared in the field of education and culture. Some progress was made 
with the implementation of the National Strategy for Education 2021-2026 and the adoption of 
legislative acts to reform higher education. Albania still needs to strengthen the quality and 
inclusiveness of education. The implementing legislation of the Law on cultural heritage and 
museums is yet to be finalised.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ optimise further the Vocational Education and Training (VET) system further in line with the 
labour market needs; 
→ further improve the professional development and training of teachers and trainers, with a 
focus on pedagogical skills for the implementation of the competence-based inclusive 
approach and digitalisation from pre-primary to university levels, including VET education; 
 
16 
 
→ adopt the implementing legislation for the Law on cultural heritage and museums. 
Chapter 29: Customs union 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of the customs union. Limited progress was made 
on the preparatory work for the development of the national component of the new 
computerised transit system (NCTS) and digitisation of more customs services.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ approve the legal provisions on the common transit procedure and develop the national 
component of the New Computerised Transit System (NCTS), as well as start preparations 
towards achieving interconnection and interoperability of its national customs IT systems 
with the EU electronic customs environment; 
→ continue pursuing the fight against smuggling of illicit goods, including tobacco, corruption 
and imports of counterfeit products, including by strengthening administrative capacity and 
improving cooperation between the authorities involved; 
→ undertake the legal adjustments necessary to keep up with developments of the EU 
customs acquis, in particular the acts implementing the Union Customs Code. 
 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY  
Chapter 14: Transport policy 
Albania has some level of preparation in the area of transport policy, with limited progress 
achieved in the reporting period. Albania adopted implementing legislation related to the rail 
sector and further measures to improve the quality and performance of the vessels sailing 
under the Albanian flag. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
 
→ adopt the new national transport strategy, and its accompanying action plan, and the new 
road safety strategy in line with the Transport Community road safety action plan;  
→ implement legislation on the railway sector reform, in line with the Transport Community rail 
action plan; 
→ continue to improve the performance of maritime transport vessels sailing under the 
Albanian flag. 
Chapter 15: Energy  
Albania is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of energy. It made 
good progress, in particular, on the internal electricity energy market. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year have been partially addressed and remain 
partly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular:  
→ update and implement the 2020-2030 national energy and climate plan (NECP), and ensure 
that the Albanian renewable energy operator is operational by the end of 2024;  
 
17 
 
→ strengthen the capacity of the Energy Efficiency Agency, continue drafting and adopting 
implementing legislation, (including establishing the energy-efficiency obligation scheme), 
and adopting the implementing regulations on labelling, in line with its obligations under the 
Energy Efficiency Directive; 
→ continue implementing the electricity integration package and notably join the EU day-ahead 
market coupling, by June 2026. 
Chapter 21: Trans-European networks 
Albania has some level of preparation in trans-European networks. Some progress was made in 
developing transport and energy networks as work to prepare projects is ongoing. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should, in particular: 
→ speed up the implementation of the TEN-T five-year workplan of the Transport Community 
Treaty and continue developing the core energy networks in line with the national strategies 
and infrastructure investment prioritisation, under the single project pipeline;  
→ continue to align its legal framework with the EU acquis and the regulations on TEN-T (trans-
European transport networks) and TEN-E (trans-European energy networks), including fully 
aligning guidelines for on trans-European energy infrastructure; 
→ strengthen capacity for and ensure progress in implementing the Economic Investment Plan 
for the Western Balkans’ projects on transport and energy. 
Chapter 27: Environment and climate change  
Albania has some level of preparation in this area and it made limited progress, in particular (i) 
in the circular economy with the setting-up of the National Agency for Waste Economy; (ii) on 
water quality with the adoption of the Laws on water resources and on protection of marine 
environment, and three river basin management plans; and (iii) on civil protection with the 
adoption of the national strategy for disaster risk reduction 2023-2030. The 2024 approval of 
the amendments to the law on protected areas, however, is considered a negative development 
and there was no particular development for addressing climate change. Further efforts are still 
needed on implementation and enforcement on the environment acquis, and the country is 
encouraged to further enhance its civil protection operational capacity and coordination with 
the Union Civil Protection Mechanism.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should, in particular: 
→ achieve fully alignment, implementation and enforcement of the Directives on 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) 
and ensure that all infrastructure investments comply with the EU environmental and 
climate acquis, national and international nature and water obligations, and ensure public 
participation; 
→ take immediate measures to fight environmental crime and achieve fully alignment with the 
Environmental Crime Directive and the Environmental Liability Directives, and strengthen 
policy implementation and law enforcement for nature and biodiversity protection, 
especially in the protected areas; 
 
18 
 
→ update and implement the National Adaptation Plan, the National Energy and Climate Plan 
(NECP) and implement the Energy Community's Decarbonisation Roadmap, focusing on the 
Monitoring Reporting Verification and Accreditation (MRVA) package to introduce carbon 
pricing and align with the EU Emission Trading System (ETS), Energy and Climate Plan, and 
update and implement the National Adaptation Plan. 
 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION 
Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development 
Albania has some level of preparation in agriculture and rural development. There was limited 
progress in building administrative capacity and on legislative alignment.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular:  
→ ensure that preconditions for the entrustment of budget implementation tasks under the 
IPARD III programme are met in line with the principles of sound financial management; 
→ ensure the necessary administrative capacity and technical support for setting up the farm 
accountancy data network (FADN); 
→ complete legislative alignment with the EU acquis notably for quality policy and organic 
production.  
Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy 
Albania has some level of preparation in the area of food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary 
policy. No progress was made over the reporting period. Significant efforts are needed to align 
and enforce the legislation with the EU acquis and enforce it. Albania should implement the 
adopted national food safety national sectoral policy. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Albania should in particular:  
→  work on alignment of national legislation with the EU acquis specifically on animal and plant 
health, official controls, animal welfare, and with the General Food Law Regulation;  
→ finalise the staffing of the veterinary service to ensure it is operational;  
→ strengthen the capacity to implement surveillance and vaccination programmes of the main 
infectious animal diseases, including rabies. 
Chapter 13: Fisheries and aquaculture 
Albania is moderately prepared in fisheries and aquaculture. It made some progress, in 
particular on continuing effective operations of the vessel monitoring system (VMS). As a 
contracting party of the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean (GFCM), Albania 
continues to actively implement the recommendations to monitor its fishing activities. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular:  
 
19 
 
→ build up the necessary administrative capacity in the fishery sector, particularly by 
completing staffing of the inspectorate and central administration, and strengthening data 
collection and scientific advice, in line with the EU’s common fisheries policy (CFP) and the 
GFCM and other international agreements;  
→ implement the regional plan of action for small-scale fisheries; 
→ adopt measures to support the fishery sector under State aid.   
Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of regional policy and coordination of structural 
instruments. Some progress was made over the reporting period. In particular, the membership 
of the interinstitutional working group for Chapter 22 negotiations was widened. Capacity-
building efforts are now required from all institutions for the implementation of cohesion policy 
programmes.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular:  
→ Prepare for the effective implementation of the EU acquis under Chapter 22 and strengthen 
preparations for the future cohesion policy, including in the institutional set-up, and the 
financial management and control systems, in terms of programming, monitoring, 
evaluation, auditing, enabling conditions and the partnership principles;  
→ Approve and implement the national strategy for regional development and cohesion and 
the regional development plans. 
→ Strengthen administrative capacity in the new structures under IPA III multiannual 
operational programmes, as well as prepare the Roadmap for Administrative Capacity 
Building in the Cohesion Policy Ecosystem, and adopt a comprehensive retention policy as 
well as a National Anti-Fraud Strategy. 
Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions  
Albania has some level of preparation on in the area of financial and budgetary provisions. 
Limited progress was made in aligning with the EU acquis in the underlying policy fields that 
affect the functioning of the EU funding system. Methodological improvements continued 
concerning on the alignment with ESA 2010 standards (European System of Accounts). There 
were also improvements to the data transmission of the excessive deficit procedure (EDP) 
tables through the Albanian Integrated Government Financial Statistics compilation system 
(AIGC).  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular:  
→ continue aligning data on national accounts to ESA 2010 and improve the 
comprehensiveness of data transmission to Eurostat, including on the excessive deficit 
procedure; 
→ align its legislation with the EU provisions rules on VAT and customs duties and strengthen 
efforts to tackle fiscal evasion and informality; 
 
20 
 
→ improve administrative capacity and coordination mechanisms among key stakeholders in 
the own-resources system. 
 
CLUSTER 6: EXTERNAL RELATIONS  
Chapter 30: External relations 
Albania has a good level of preparation in external relations. Limited progress was made during 
the reporting period, in particular in implementation of CEFTA protocols and in efforts to develop its 
export control system. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular:  
→ continue to implement Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) additional protocol 
5 on trade facilitation and additional protocol 6 on trade in services, and take the necessary 
steps to implement additional protocol 7 on dispute settlement, and implement actions 
under the new action plan for 2025-2028; 
→ establish the legal framework that covers international cooperation and development policy 
and humanitarian aid, in line with the EU policies and principles.  
Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy 
Albania has a good level of preparation in the field of foreign, security and defence policy. Good 
progress was made as the country maintained its track-record of full alignment with relevant 
High Representative statements on behalf of the EU and relevant Council decisions, including 
EU restrictive measures related to Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine. The country 
started negotiations on a Security and Defence Partnership with the EU in spring 2024. Albania 
continued to participate in EU crisis management missions and operations under the common 
security and defence policy. 
The recommendations from last year were largely implemented and remain partially valid. In the 
coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ maintain full alignment with the EU’s common foreign and security policy and strengthen its 
implementation in all international fora and its enforcement capacity to enforce regarding 
restrictive measures; 
→ consider increasing its participation in EU crisis management missions and operations; 
→ continue implementing its national strategy on small arms and light weapons and step up 
the investigation and prosecution of firearms trafficking. 
 
1.3. STATE OF PLAY OF THE ACCESSION NEGOTIATIONS 
Following the Intergovernmental Conference on accession negotiations with Albania in 2022, 
the Commission immediately launched the analytical examination of the EU acquis – the 
‘screening’ process. After tabling the screening report on cluster 1 - Fundamentals in July 2023, 
the Commission presented the opening benchmarks assessment report to the Council. Therein, 
the Commission concluded that the roadmap for public administration reform and the roadmap