3 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 1 
1.1. CONTEXT 
Following the second intergovernmental conference of 15 October 2024, which opened 
accession negotiations on cluster 1 – fundamentals, four intergovernmental conferences 
were convened leading to the opening of negotiations on four clusters. Albania continued to 
implement the Stabilisation and Association Agreement, and the joint bodies under the 
agreement met.  
The firm political commitment of the Albanian authorities to the strategic goal of EU 
integration has been consistently stated as the country’s key priority, and a high level of 
ambition to move forward in the accession negotiations has been generally maintained. The 
ongoing momentum in the accession negotiation process needs to lead to faster EU-related 
reforms. Albania maintained its record of full alignment with the EU’s common foreign and 
security policy, aligning with the EU position, including on restrictive measures and 
sanctions against Russia. Albania’s stance sends a strong signal of its strategic choice of 
EU accession and of its role as a reliable partner. 
Albania has actively engaged and started delivering on the implementation of the new 
Growth Plan for the Western Balkans across the four pillars: (i) gradual integration with the 
EU single market; (ii) regional economic integration; (iii) fundamental reforms; and (iv) 
increased financial support. Under the Reform and Growth Facility (RGF), a performance-
based EU instrument supporting the EU accession process, the country adopted its reform 
agenda, which covers reforms in the areas of: (i) business environment; (ii) human capital; 
(iii) digitalisation; (iv) energy and green transition; and (v) fundamental rights and the rule of 
law. After initial delays in setting up internal coordination structures, Albania appointed a 
RGF national coordinator and continued to work towards the reform agenda targets.  
The Commission’s 2025 rule of law report 2 covered Albania for the second time.   
 
1.2. MAIN FINDINGS OF THE REPORT 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
Democracy  
The overall framework allows for generally free and fair elections. The parliamentary 
elections held on 11 May 2025, which followed a partial electoral reform, resulted in a fourth 
consecutive term for the ruling party. The preliminary conclusions of the Organization for 
Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) / Office for Democratic Institutions and Human 
Rights (ODIHR) election observation mission noted that elections were competitive and 
professionally conducted, but identified some shortcomings, including the lack of a level 
playing field and abuse of public resources. The partial electoral reform amended the 
 
1 This report covers the period from 1 September 2024 to 1 September 2025. It is based on input from a variety 
of sources, including contributions from the government of Albania, EU Member States, European Parliament 
reports and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also includes the 
results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule 
of law. 
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of 
preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made 
during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, 
good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been used. 
2 COM(2025) 900 final. 
 
4 
 
Electoral Code but failed to address a number of longstanding recommendations from the 
OSCE/ODIHR and the Venice Commission. A comprehensive electoral reform is needed.  
Parliament can exercise its powers in a partially effective way. Political polarisation, lack of 
genuine political dialogue and clashes between the ruling majority and parts of the 
opposition continued to affect Parliament’s activity, while public consultation processes 
remained limited. Parliament is also hampered by limited oversight over the executive, while 
the politicisation of parliamentary appointments to top positions in constitutional bodies or 
independent institutions established by law remains a serious issue. Concerns were noted 
regarding the work, methodology and impact of the ad hoc parliamentary committee on 
deepening reforms for good governance, rule of law and anti-corruption. Following the 11 
May elections, the number of standing committees increased from eight to eleven, of which 
four are chaired by opposition.   
The government continued to show its commitment to EU integration. Following the 11 May 
parliamentary elections, a new government took office in September 2025. The division of 
responsibilities between local and central government remains an issue 
Albania’s bodies in charge of the EU integration process are in place. They successfully 
coordinated national positions, leading to the opening of negotiations on five of the six 
clusters during the reporting period. EU integration expertise, planning and interinstitutional 
mechanisms will need to be further strengthened to sustain Albania’s ambition to speed up 
the reforms required by the EU accession process. The EU integration process needs to be 
more inclusive, cross-party, and supported by effective consultation mechanisms. 
Communication efforts on EU integration should intensify.  
Civil society organisations (CSOs) operate in a partly enabling environment. They face 
challenges regarding registration requirements and limited public funding, along with an 
increase in negative narratives and online smear campaigns.  
Public administration reform 
Albania remains moderately prepared in the area of public administration reform (PAR). It 
made some progress during the reporting period, resulting in the adoption of the new 
Intersectoral Strategy Against Corruption (ISAC) 2024–2030 and Medium-Term Revenue 
Strategy 2024–2027 in December 2024, and of the Cross-Cutting Strategy on Public 
Administration Reform 2025-2030 in July 2025. Amendments to the laws on civil service and 
on the organisation of state administration remain to be adopted, with the latter submitted 
for public consultation. The practice of budget revisions carried out through normative acts 
adopted by the executive continues. Clear political steer for the PAR agenda from the 
Minister of State for Public Administration and Anti-Corruption continued.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ start implementing the new public administration strategy and review the effectiveness 
of the current monitoring structures; limit the use of normative acts for budget revisions 
and pursue a return to regular budget revision processes; 
→ adopt and implement a new legislative framework for the civil service, which includes 
revised rules on merit-based recruitment, promotion and dismissal in the civil service law 
at all levels, especially senior level, and begin automating the payroll system again; 
→ adopt and implement revised legislation properly regulating the typology and criteria to 
set up subordinated institutions and clarifying lines of accountability. 
 
 
5 
 
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights  
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of judiciary and fundamental rights and has 
made some progress during the reporting period. 
Functioning of the judiciary  
Albania is between having a moderate and a good level of preparation and has made some 
progress on the functioning of the judiciary. Albania continued implementing the justice 
reform. The vetting process for all judges and prosecutors was finalised in first instance, 
further strengthening judicial independence and accountability. Vetting procedures on 
appeal have increased in pace and are now on track to meet the constitutional deadline of 
June 2026.  The High Judicial Council (HJC) has adopted by-laws enhancing its procedures 
and standards applicable to its members and to judges. The High Prosecutorial Council 
(HPC) has also enhanced standards applicable to magistrates. The HJC has proceeded with 
new appointments of magistrates, contributing to a reduction of vacancies at first instance 
level. Challenges in the appointments of non-magistrate members of the HJC and HPC, and 
in conducting timely and qualitative evaluations, appointments, promotions, and transfers of 
magistrates remained. While the resilience of the judiciary has improved overall, increased 
attempts by public officials or politicians to exert undue interference and pressure on the 
judicial system remained an issue of serious concern. A new Cross-Sector Justice Strategy 
for 2024-2030 was adopted. Sufficient budget was allocated to develop a modern, 
integrated, electronic case management system, but full establishment is currently foreseen 
only for 2030. Pressing issues on judicial efficiency, quality and integrity still need to be 
addressed, in line with the best European standards and practices.  
Sustained reform efforts are needed to continue to strengthen the judicial system and 
maintain high standards of integrity after the completion of the vetting process. The 
Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and therefore 
remain largely valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ further strengthen accountability by: (i) finalising the vetting process; (ii) enhancing 
asset and background assessment standards, ensuring high-quality and speeding-up 
evaluation reports for all magistrates; (iii) aligning rules applicable to all non-magistrates 
of the HJC and HPC with those applicable to magistrates, as regards asset declaration 
and background checks; (iv) filling the magistrate-inspector vacancies at the High 
Justice Inspectorate, and (v) reducing political interference on the judiciary and 
prosecution services; 
→ improve the quality of justice by: (i) filling vacancies for court chairs, magistrates, legal 
advisers and court staff at all levels of the judiciary and increasing the total number of 
magistrates and legal advisers at all levels, towards the EU average; (ii) comprehensively 
revising the School of Magistrates’ entrance exam and initial and continuous training 
curricula; and (iii) increasing the quality and integrity of the School of Magistrates’ staff;  
→ improve judicial efficiency by: (i) adopting comprehensive legal and regulatory measures 
to increase efficiency at all levels, and to further reduce backlog, in line with the 
Roadmap for Judicial Efficiency, the principles of justice reform and European 
standards; (ii) finalising the procurement for and first piloting of the integrated case 
management system modules and (iii) expanding the online notification system for 
access to court files and processes to all courts of general jurisdiction.  
Fight against corruption  
Albania is moderately prepared and has shown some progress. The Anti-Corruption 
Strategy for 2024-2030 has been adopted. The Specialised Structure Against Organised 
Crime and Corruption (SPAK) further consolidated its positive results in fighting high-level 
 
6 
 
corruption and made tangible progress towards a solid track record in the fight against 
corruption. However, corruption remained widespread across vulnerable sectors, affecting 
both the public and private spheres. The institutional framework for prevention of corruption 
continued to have a limited impact and coordination with law enforcement remained weak. 
Shortcomings regarding transparency and effectiveness of asset declaration checks still 
need to be addressed. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ continue to strengthen the investigation, prosecution and adjudication of corruption 
cases and secure more final convictions, in particular at high-level, including the seizure 
and final confiscation of criminal assets resulting from corruption-related offences, and 
increase proactive referrals by relevant state institutions and law enforcement agencies 
to SPAK; 
→ complete and simplify legislation on preventing corruption in line with European 
standards, and address the remaining recommendations of the Council of Europe’s 
Group of States against Corruption (GRECO); conduct in-depth risk assessments in 
vulnerable sectors, implement effectively integrity plans at corruption-prone institutions, 
such as the State Cadastre Agency, and increase the capacity of the General Directorate 
on Anti-Corruption (GDAC); 
→ make asset declaration checks by the High Inspectorate of Declaration and Audit of 
Assets and Conflicts of Interest (HIDAACI) more effective and transparent by updating 
procedures and ensuring sufficient resources, addressing undeclared or concealed 
assets and by ensuring that asset declarations of politically exposed persons are 
publicly available online. 
Fundamental rights  
Albania’s legal framework sets out a generally good basis for the protection of fundamental 
rights. Significant achievement was made during the reporting period with the adoption of a 
new Law on personal data protection and seven of its ten accompanying pieces of 
implementing legislation, in full alignment with the EU acquis, as well as the adoption of 
implementing legislation on the rights to persons belonging to national minorities, in the 
core areas of self-identification and the use of minority languages, consistent with European 
standards. The enjoyment of media freedom and pluralism, of the right to property and of 
the rights of persons belonging to minorities remain problematic. Implementation efforts 
need to intensify overall.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
remain mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ ensure effective implementation of the legal framework on the rights of persons 
belonging to minorities and increase the capacity and resources of the State Committee 
on National Minorities and of local authorities; 
→ expand the enjoyment of the right to property and legal certainty by: (i) making progress 
on first registrations; (ii) digitising ownership titles, documents, and maps; (iii) improving 
the quality and accuracy of cadastral data; (iv) enhancing integrity, transparency, and 
effectiveness in delivering public services at the State Cadastre Agency; and (v) 
advancing on compensations and guaranteeing the right to a fair trial in cases of 
expropriation and removal of properties; 
→ further align with and implement the EU acquis on equality and non-discrimination 
including as regards sexual orientation and gender expression, ensure that the upcoming 
 
7 
 
Law on gender equality maintains a high level of ambition in line with EU standards, and 
demonstrate good implementation capacity of the new Law on personal data protection, 
implement effectively the National Agenda on Child Rights and complete the 
deinstitutionalisation of children. 
Freedom of expression  
Albania is between having some and a moderate level of preparation in the area of freedom 
of expression and made limited progress during the reporting period. The situation remains 
largely unchanged, with media independence and pluralism continuing to be affected by the 
overlap of business and political interests, the lack of transparency of financing sources, the 
high concentration of media ownership, intimidation and precarious working conditions for 
journalists. The launch of a structured dialogue between Albanian institutions and media 
actors as well as the adoption of soft measures on journalise safety were positive 
developments. Concerns were raised, however, regarding the legality and due process 
observed during the eviction by the authorities of a media outlet from the public-owned 
offices it occupied. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ adopt a major reform of the legal and regulatory framework to: (i) strengthen 
transparency of media ownership, media plurality and editorial independence; (ii) 
strengthen transparency of media financing from private and state resources; (iii) 
strengthen the autonomy of the media regulator and the independence of the state 
broadcaster; (iv) fully repeal criminal provisions on insult and defamation; and (v) align 
civil aspects of defamation with European standards;  
→ ensure zero tolerance for intimidation and effective enforcement in cases of attacks 
against journalists, including judicial follow-up; ensure increased capacities of law 
enforcement bodies to handle cases of violence, including on the margins of protests, 
and other criminal cases involving journalists, notably by ensuring high human rights 
compliance in handling incidents involving journalists, through binding instructions, data 
collection and capacity building measures; 
→ improve Albanian journalists’ working conditions, in particular by strengthening the 
protection of journalists’ employment and social rights and ensuring that the Labour 
Code is applied consistently. 
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security  
Albania is moderately prepared in aligning with the EU acquis in the area of justice, freedom 
and security and has made good progress in this area. The capacity and effectiveness of 
the Specialised Structure Against Organised Crime and Corruption (SPAK) to disrupt 
organised crime groups increased and the use of financial investigations improved. 
Although their full functionality still needs to be demonstrated, an asset recovery office and 
a national early warning system on the detection of new psychoactive substances were set 
up within the Albanian State Police. A national drugs observatory has been established 
within the Ministry of Health, though it is still to become operational. Albania continued to 
implement its migration strategy, which is aligned with EU priorities. Further efforts are 
needed to improve access to asylum and to align the country’s visa policy with the EU’s. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain  
valid to a significant extent. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ further develop the systematic use of financial investigations when dealing with serious 
and organised crime, including illicit trafficking, terrorism and money laundering; 
 
8 
 
→ operationalise the national drugs observatory and increase the functioning and output 
of the national early warning system on the detection of new psychoactive substances, 
including by strengthening cooperation with the EU Drugs Agency; 
→ improve the asylum referral system and access to asylum procedures, continue to 
address the issue of unfounded asylum applications of Albanian nationals in Schengen 
and associated countries, ensure that legal pathways developed for third-country 
nationals in Albania prevent irregular secondary movements to the EU, and further align 
the country’s visa policy with the EU list of visa-required third countries. 
Fight against serious and organised crime 
Albania is moderately prepared in the fight against organised crime. Good progress was 
made in meeting last year’s recommendations by increasing SPAK’s capacity in financial 
investigations, strengthening the fight against money laundering and seizing assets linked to 
organised crime. SPAK has also further consolidated cooperation with its international 
counterparts, in particular with EU Member States and EU agencies, to investigate and crack 
down on high-risk criminal groups with initial tangible results. Albania needs to speed up 
work on aligning its legal framework on organised crime with the EU acquis, strengthen law 
enforcement capacity and improve the efficiency of investigations, including through the 
development of criminal and financial analysis capabilities.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ continue to strengthen its track record of investigations, prosecutions and final 
convictions in all fields of serious and organised crime, including drug trafficking, money 
laundering and terrorist financing through continued cooperation with EU Member States 
and EU agencies, and by increasing capacity to deter organised crime and ensuring 
further alignment with the EU acquis, notably on the criminalisation of money laundering 
and combating child sexual abuse and exploitation online and offline;  
→ improve the efficiency of the asset recovery system, by strengthening the functioning of 
the asset recovery office responsible for identifying and tracing criminal assets within 
the Albanian state police, notably its operational cooperation with asset recovery offices 
in EU Member States, by improving the implementation of instruments to confiscate 
proceeds of crime and property derived from criminal activities, and by better managing 
frozen and confiscated property also for social reuse;  
→ improve criminal and financial analysis capacity, including through reinforced inter-
agency cooperation and methodologies to tackle complex criminal cases. 
ECONOMIC CRITERIA 
The existence of a functioning market economy 
Albania has a good level of preparation in developing a functioning market economy and 
made some progress in this area. The economy maintained a strong growth momentum in 
2024 thanks to robust domestic demand and tourism. Inflation fell below the central bank’s 
target while fiscal consolidation accelerated, and the public debt ratio continued to decline. 
Despite increases, government revenue as a share of GDP remains low, while spending on 
public investment is repeatedly under-executed. The labour market situation improved, but 
structural problems persist. The banking sector remained stable, well capitalised and liquid, 
while lending to the private sector increased. The business environment remains affected by 
a weak rule of law, limited access to finance, and shortcomings in the oversight and 
governance of state-owned enterprises. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partly addressed and remain 
 
9 
 
largely valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ implement the Medium-Term Revenue Strategy and prepare proposals to reduce tax 
expenditure, prioritising the elimination of exemptions lacking sound policy justification; 
→ increase the transparency and accountability of state-owned enterprises, including by 
publishing their annual financial performance reports; 
→ enhance the operationalisation of the public investment management framework, 
including the National Single Project Pipeline, and ensure that the projects entering the 
Medium-Term Budget Programme are mature and of good quality, in order to avoid the 
under-execution of public investments. 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the EU 
Albania has some level of preparation to cope with competitive pressure and market forces 
within the EU and made limited progress in this area. The education system still faces 
numerous challenges, skills gaps persist, and the youth not in education, employment or 
training (NEET) rate remains a concern. Transport and digital infrastructure improved, but 
infrastructure gaps remain. Albania remains competitive as a tourism destination, offering 
an expanding scope of services, but industry and agriculture remain low-productivity sectors 
that have been contracting. Manufacturing exports fell due to weak demand, exchange rate 
appreciation, and businesses’ low pricing power. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ continue to improve and better promote the vocational education and training (VET) 
system in order to increase the number of graduates from VET schools and ensure that 
labour skills align with job market demands; 
→ improve the quality and inclusiveness of the education system and advance its digital 
transformation; 
→ strengthen infrastructure, including building cyber-resilience. 
Chapter 5: Public procurement 
Albania is moderately prepared in public procurement. Limited progress was made in the 
alignment of the legal framework for public procurement. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should, in particular: 
→ continue efforts to improve competitive procurement procedures; 
→ further align the legislative framework with the EU acquis in the area of concessions and 
public-private partnerships, and start work on further alignment with the EU acquis in the 
field of defence and security procurement; 
→ ensure compliance with the EU acquis and the Stabilisation and Association Agreement 
(SAA) on intergovernmental agreements concluded with third countries in the area of 
public procurement. 
Chapter 18: Statistics 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of statistics. Some progress was made in 
improving the compilation of macroeconomic statistics in line with the European System of 
National and Regional Accounts (ESA 2010), the publication of the detailed data of the 2023 
population and housing census, and by continuing to improve data transmission to Eurostat. 
 
10 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ continue increasing the production and dissemination of timely and high-quality data and 
make government finance statistics (GFS) data publicly available; 
→ prepare the 2026 agricultural census in line with the relevant EU acquis; 
→ ensure adequate staffing at the Institute for Statistics (INSTAT). 
Chapter 32: Financial control 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of financial control and partially aligned with the 
EU acquis. Despite the adoption of the anti-fraud strategy, limited progress was made in this 
chapter during the reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ focus on delegating more financial and management responsibilities to improve 
managerial accountability; 
→ build on the initial work of the parliamentary subcommittee on audit, with a particular 
focus 
on 
ensuring 
oversight 
of 
the 
executive’s 
implementation 
of 
audit 
recommendations; 
→ strengthen controls and consolidate capacities to protect EU financial interests, ensure 
appropriate reporting of irregularities, and implement the anti-fraud strategy. 
 
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET 
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods 
Albania is between having some and a moderate level of preparation in the area of free 
movement of goods. No progress on alignment with the EU acquis was achieved in the 
reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ complete the alignment of its legislation with the relevant EU acquis on quality 
infrastructure, i.e. on accreditation, conformity assessment and market surveillance; 
→ significantly strengthen the enforcement capacity of the market surveillance 
inspectorate; 
→ finalise and adopt an action plan to comply with Articles 34-36 of the Treaty on the 
Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), fully covering the non-harmonised area, with 
a timeframe for screening all legislation and practices, and introducing mutual 
recognition clauses or repealing and/or amending legislation and practices as 
necessary. 
Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers 
Albania is between having some and a moderate level of preparation in the freedom of 
movement for workers. Some progress was achieved by concluding bilateral social security 
agreements with EU Member States and further advancing the preparations to connect 
Albania’s employment services system to the European network of employment services 
(EURES). 
 
11 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ continue developing the employment services IT system to enable its connection to 
EURES upon accession; 
→ strengthen the enforcement of the Law on foreigners as per the National Migration 
Strategy 2024-2026; 
→ continue negotiating and concluding new bilateral agreements on social security, 
notably with EU Member States, and develop IT infrastructure for European Health 
Insurance Card (EHIC) and Electronic Exchange of Social Security Information (EESSI) 
purposes, as well as administrative capacities for joining the EESSI network.  
Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services 
Albania is moderately prepared in the right of establishment and freedom to provide 
services. No progress was achieved in the reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ start amending the legislation to address the barriers to the freedom of establishment 
and free movement of services identified in the 2023 self-screening exercise; 
→ continue efforts to align its legislation with the EU acquis and ensure appropriate 
institutional capacity in the area of mutual recognition of professional qualifications. 
Chapter 4: Free movement of capital 
Albania is between a moderate and good level of preparation in the area of free movement 
of capital. Some progress was made towards closer alignment with the EU acquis on 
payments, which enabled Albania to join the geographical scope of the Single Euro 
Payments Area (SEPA) schemes in November 2024, which became effective in October 
2025. Albania has continued its action against money laundering, in particular with the 
adoption of the National Strategy on the Fight Against Money Laundering and Terrorist 
Financing 2024-2030. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ ensure equal treatment of EU citizens and Albanian citizens on the acquisition of land, in 
line with Albania’s obligation under the SAA; 
→ take action to ensure that the provisions of the EU acquis on the cross-border regulation, 
the SEPA regulation, the Instant Payment Regulation and interchange fees are 
implemented; 
→ continue to implement the 2024-2030 Anti-Money Laundering and Terrorism Financing 
Strategy and National Risk Assessment Action Plan 2024-2027. 
Chapter 6: Company law 
Albania is moderately prepared in the field of company law. Limited progress was made in 
the reporting period through the adoption of the Law on auditing and accounting, aimed to 
further align with the EU acquis. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ make progress in aligning with the EU acquis, including by introducing amendments on 
the use of digital tools, cross-border conversions, mergers and divisions, and on 
 
12 
 
encouraging long-term shareholder engagement; 
→ continue to implement the amended Law on auditing and continue efforts to further align 
the legal framework for accounting and audit with the latest EU acquis in these areas. 
Chapter 7: Intellectual property law 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of intellectual property rights (IPR). Some 
progress was made with the adoption of the new laws on trademarks and patents. The new 
draft law on copyright was prepared and submitted for consultation and approval. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ ensure alignment with the relevant EU acquis on IPR, and start to implement the new 
laws on copyright, trademarks and patents; 
→ continue to improve the functioning of CMOs, especially in terms of enforcement and 
collection of royalties and payments to rights holders; 
→ strengthen the enforcement of all aspects of the IPR system through monitoring, 
budgeting, increased awareness, strengthened institutional capacity and training. 
Chapter 8: Competition policy 
Albania is between having some and a moderate level of preparation in competition policy. 
There was limited progress during the reporting period, including on legislative alignment 
with the EU acquis in the area of case referrals in relation to concentrations. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented only to a limited 
extent and remain valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ ensure the operational independence of the State Appeal Commission (SAC) and 
significantly increase the administrative capacity of the SAC’s secretariat; 
→ further align the legislative framework in the area of State aid with the EU acquis; 
→ step up efforts to raise awareness among the judiciary, line ministries and regional and 
local authorities of competition law and State aid rules, to ensure that the SAC is notified 
in advance of aid measures and to strengthen the enforcement of competition rules and 
State aid rules. 
Chapter 9: Financial services 
Albania is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of financial 
services. Some progress was made in further aligning the country’s legislation with the EU 
acquis on private pension funds. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ continue working towards fully aligning Albania’s banking regulation with the amended 
versions of the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD)/Regulation (CRR), the Bank 
Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD), and the Deposit Guarantee Schemes Directive 
(DGS) and the EU acquis on capital markets, including securities markets, investment 
funds and financial market infrastructures; 
→ complete alignment with the EU acquis on insurance, including the Solvency II Directive; 
→ ensure that the Albanian National Development Bank is well regulated and supervised, 
including its deposit-taking activities. 
 
13 
 
Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection 
Preparations are at an early stage in the area of consumer and health protection. There was 
no progress on alignment with the EU acquis in this area. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ make progress on aligning consumer law with the latest EU acquis to address 
developments in this area; 
→ complete alignment with the EU acquis on medicinal products for human and veterinary 
use, medical devices and on tobacco control; 
→ increase the financial and human resources in the health sector, specifically in primary 
healthcare and all-hazard health emergency preparedness, and guarantee equal access 
to quality health services for vulnerable populations, in particular women and girls who 
belong to these groups. 
 
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH 
Chapter 10: Digital transformation and media 
Albania is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the field of digital 
transformation and media and made limited progress during the reporting period. The 
current Law on cybersecurity enabled further alignment with the EU Directive on measures 
for a high common level of cybersecurity across the Union (NIS 2 Directive). In June 2025, 
Albania adopted an updated list of Critical and Important Information Infrastructure 
Operators. The new Cybersecurity Strategy 2025-2030 and its Action Plan for 2025-2027 
have been adopted. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular 
→ adopt the decision to extend the roll-out of the 112 emergency number to the whole 
country; 
→ finalise the implementing legislation for the Law on electronic communications and the 
Law on cybersecurity; 
→ improve access to the use of e-services, build this capacity and step up the collection of 
statistical data on digital performance and digital competitiveness as per the Digital 
Economy and Society Index. 
Chapter 16: Taxation 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of taxation. Some progress was made in the 
reporting period, mainly through the adoption of the Medium-Term Revenue Strategy and the 
report on evaluation of tax exemptions, paving the way for improved tax policy measures 
and reform in the next years. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ reduce the number of tax exemptions in line with the adopted Medium-Term Revenue 
Strategy, and pursue the gradual alignment of VAT and excise duties legislation with the 
EU acquis; 
→ simplify the taxation system to further encourage tax compliance, and further improve 
 
14 
 
the use of third-party data in the fight against tax fraud and evasion; 
→ continue preparations towards achieving interconnection and interoperability with the 
common EU taxation IT systems. 
Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy 
Albania is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of economic and 
monetary policy and made some progress as the Bank of Albania maintained price stability. 
Albania continued its fiscal consolidation and complied with the fiscal rule. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should, in particular: 
→ fully align the Law on the Bank of Albania with the EU acquis; 
→ adopt the law to establish an independent fiscal institution;  
→ align Albania’s budget legislation and practices with the requirements of the EU acquis. 
Chapter 19: Social policy and employment 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of social policy and employment and made 
limited progress during the reporting period. No measures are in place to set up and 
implement an indexation mechanism for the benefits of economic aid. More work is needed 
on advancing legislative alignment with the EU Labour Law and occupational health and 
safety acquis, and with EU acquis in the area of non-discrimination and equality, including 
gender equality.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should: 
→ set up the Interministerial Council of Occupational Health and Safety and its secretariat, 
including drafting the respective sets of rules/procedures and building the capacity of its 
members, increase and strengthen cross-sectoral coordination, and boost municipal 
capacity and staffing; 
→ roll out the Youth Guarantee and its Implementation Plan to more regions, taking the 
lessons learned from its pilot phase into account; 
→ further increase budget allocation, social services provision and monitoring of the Social 
Fund, strengthen the capacity of local governments to secure sufficient funding, and 
develop a coordinated social service referral system, consistently implemented at local 
level.  
Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy 
Albania is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of enterprise and 
industrial policy and made some progress, in particular through revising the Business and 
Investment Development Strategy (BIDS). 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should, in particular: 
→ accelerate addressing the main challenges to the business environment while improving 
the predictability of regulatory measures and improve the implementation of the BIDS, 
notably by ascertaining the needed funding of foreseen actions;   
→ speed up the full alignment with the EU acquis on late payments Directive; 
→ draft and adopt a unified investment law that would address current challenges faced by 
investors, and secure legally sound property titles. 
 
15 
 
Chapter 25: Science and research 
Albania is between having some and a moderate level of preparation in the area of science 
and research. Some progress was made with the approval of the Smart Specialisation 
Strategy and the adoption of the Law on science and scientific research, which is aligned 
with the relevant EU acquis, as well as the first successful call managed by the Albanian 
Start-Up Agency. Albania still needs to adopt the required implementing legislation to ensure 
effective implementation of the 2023-2030 National Strategy on Scientific Research, 
Technology and Innovation. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ increase investment in research, in line with its own commitments and the new European 
Research Area priorities, with a view to reaching 1% of GDP by 2030; 
→ implement the Smart Specialisation Strategy and Action Plan; 
→ produce reliable statistics and data on innovation, science and technology with a view to 
improving Albania’s classification in the European innovation scoreboard. 
Chapter 26: Education and culture 
Albania is between a moderate and good level of preparation in the field of education and 
culture. Some progress was made with the implementation of the National Strategy for 
Education 2021-2026 and the adoption of legislative acts to reform higher education. 
Albania still needs to strengthen the quality and inclusiveness of education. The 
implementing legislation of the Law on cultural heritage and museums has yet to be 
finalised. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ further optimise the VET system in line with labour market needs; 
→ further improve the professional development and training of teachers and trainers, with 
a focus on (i) pedagogical skills to implement the competence-based inclusive approach 
and (ii) digitalisation from pre-primary to university levels, including VET education; 
→ adopt the implementing legislation for the Law on cultural heritage and museums. 
Chapter 29: Customs union 
Albania is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of the Customs 
Union. Some progress was made with the amendments to the legal provisions for the 
customs code, the development of the new computerised transit system (NCTS) and 
digitalisation of more customs services. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ adopt and implement the legal provisions on the common transit procedure at national 
level and finalise the development of the national component of the NCTS, as well as 
continue preparations for achieving the interconnection and interoperability of its 
national customs IT systems with the EU electronic customs environment; 
→ continue the fight against the smuggling of illicit goods, including tobacco products, 
corruption and imports of counterfeit products, including by strengthening administrative 
capacity and improving cooperation between the authorities involved, as well as with the 
European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF); 
 
16 
 
→ complete the legal adjustments necessary to keep up with developments of the EU 
customs acquis, in particular the acts implementing the Union Customs Code as well as 
other EU legislation enforced by customs 
L 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY 
Chapter 14: Transport policy 
Albania has some level of preparation in the area of transport policy, with limited progress 
achieved in the reporting period. Albania adopted legislation to separate its railway company 
into distinct entities and set up a road traffic monitoring centre with intelligent transport 
systems (ITS). 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ adopt the new National Transport Strategy, and its accompanying Action Plan, and the 
new Road Safety Strategy in line with the EU acquis and the Transport Community Road 
Safety Action Plan; 
→ finalise the reform of the Albanian Road Authority to enable the smooth progression of 
Service Level Agreement; 
→ implement legislation on the railway sector reform, in line with the Transport Community 
Rail Action Plan. 
Chapter 15: Energy 
Albania has a good level of preparation in the area of energy. It made good progress, in 
particular on the internal electricity energy market. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ accelerate the adoption of the updated 2021-2030 National Energy and Climate Plan 
(NECP) in line with the 2030 Energy Community targets and recommendations; 
→ strengthen the capacity of the Energy Efficiency Agency, continue drafting and adopting 
implementing legislation (including setting up the energy efficiency obligation scheme), 
in line with its obligations under the Energy Efficiency Directive, and adopt the 
implementing regulations on labelling; 
→ continue implementing the Electricity Integration Package and, in particular, join the EU 
Day-ahead market coupling by June 2026. 
Chapter 21: Trans-European networks 
Albania has some level of preparation in trans-European networks. Some progress was 
made in developing transport and energy networks, and work to prepare projects is still 
ongoing. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ speed up the implementation of the TEN-T (trans-European transport networks) five-year 
rolling workplan of the Transport Community Treaty and continue developing the core 
energy networks in line with the national strategies and infrastructure investment 
prioritisation, under the single project pipeline; 
→ continue to align its legal framework with the EU acquis and the regulations on TEN-T 
 
17 
 
and TEN-E (trans-European energy networks), including fully aligning with guidelines on 
trans-European energy infrastructure, and strengthen administrative capacity; 
→ accelerate the preparatory work and initiate investments to complete the projects on the 
Western Balkans – Eastern Mediterranean European Transport Corridor. 
Chapter 27: Environment and climate change 
Albania has some level of preparation in this area, and it made noprogress over the 
reporting period. The country needs to adopt its draft laws on integrated waste management 
and on extended producer responsibility. In March 2025, the new ‘mountain package’ law 
was adopted, with the stated intention of promoting investment projects in forests and 
pastures through fiscal incentives and land acquisition facilities for investors. This could 
have significant implications for local land use and environmental management. No major 
developments were reported on water quality, where the relevant implementing legislation is 
still under preparation, nor on air quality or civil protection. No particular development was 
reported on addressing climate change. Albania should adopt the updated National Energy 
and Climate Plan (NECP) 2021-2030, since the consultation phase has been completed. 
Further efforts are still needed on implementation and enforcement of the environment and 
climate acquis. The Law on water resources and the Law on the marine environment 
protection strategy entered into force in October 2024. The creation of a portfolio of minister 
for the environment in the new government is a welcome development. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were therefore implemented to a limited 
extent and remain valid. In the coming year, Albania should, in particular: 
→ achieve full alignment, implementation and enforcement of the Directives on 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) 
and ensure that all infrastructure investments comply with the EU environment and 
climate acquis and national and international nature and water obligations, and ensure 
public participation; 
→ take immediate measures to fight environmental crime and achieve full alignment with 
the Environmental Crime Directive and the Environmental Liability Directive, and 
strengthen policy implementation and law enforcement for nature and biodiversity 
protection, especially in protected areas; 
→ update and implement the National Adaptation Plan, accelerate the adoption of the 
updated 2021-2030 NECP, align with the Monitoring, Reporting, Verification and 
Accreditation (MRVA) acquis for the purpose of introducing carbon pricing and aligning 
with the EU Emission Trading System (ETS). 
 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION 
Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development 
Albania has some level of preparation in agriculture and rural development. There was 
limited progress in building administrative capacity and on legislative alignment. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ ensure that the preconditions for the entrustment of budget implementation tasks under 
the Instrument for pre-accession assistance for rural development (IPARD) III 
programme are met in line with the principles of sound financial management; 
→ ensure that there is the administrative capacity and technical support needed to set up 
the farm sustainability data network (FSDN); 
 
18 
 
→ complete legislative alignment with the EU acquis, in particular on quality policy. 
Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy 
Albania has some level of preparation in the area of food safety, veterinary and 
phytosanitary policy. Limited progress was made over the reporting period. The Animal 
Health and Plant Health laws were adopted. However, further efforts are still needed to align 
the legislation under this chapter with the EU acquis and enforce it. Albania should 
implement the adopted national food safety sectoral policy. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ work on alignment of national legislation with the EU food acquis in general and, 
specifically, on adopting the laws on official controls and animal welfare and the General 
Food Law Regulation, and prepare a national plan for the upgrade of establishments 
producing food, feed and animal byproducts to meet EU structural standards; 
→ ensure that Albania’s competent authorities have the appropriate resources needed to 
properly implement and enforce the laws, including resources for official controls, and 
ensure sufficient laboratory capacities as well as a clear separation between risk 
management and risk assessment within the National Food Authority; 
→ strengthen its capacity to design and implement effective surveillance, monitoring and 
vaccination programmes for the main infectious animal diseases, including rabies. 
Chapter 13: Fisheries and aquaculture 
Albania is moderately prepared in fisheries and aquaculture. It made some progress in 
particular by continuing to operate the vessel monitoring system (VMS) effectively. As a 
contracting party of the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean (GFCM), 
Albania continues to actively implement the recommendations for monitoring its fishing 
activities. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ strengthen the administrative capacity needed for inspection and control capacities, and 
for data collection and scientific advice, in line with the EU’s common fisheries policy 
and the GFCM and other international agreements; 
→ implement the regional action plan for small-scale fisheries; 
→ adopt measures to support the fishery sector under State aid. 
Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of regional policy and coordination of structural 
instruments. Some progress was made during the reporting period, notably by moving 
towards fulfilment of enabling conditions, introducing legislative changes and building 
administrative capacity. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and 
therefore remain mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ prepare for the effective implementation of the EU acquis under Chapter 22 and 
strengthen preparations and capacities for the future cohesion policy in terms of 
programming, implementation, monitoring, evaluation, communication, financial 
management, control and audit, enabling conditions and the partnership principle; as 
well as guarantee mechanisms to ensure co-financing of multi-annual programmes in 
 
19 
 
view of the preparation and execution of project pipelines for future cohesion policy, 
including those related to sustainable urban development;  
→ strengthen administrative capacity for programmes under indirect management by 
beneficiary country and territorial cooperation programmes with Member States and 
neighbouring non-Member States, prepare the roadmap for administrative capacity 
building at central, regional and local level in the cohesion policy ecosystem, and adopt 
a comprehensive retention policy and ensure stability and continuity of the structures, in 
particular senior management, in preparation for the future cohesion policy; 
→ ensure coordination between competent authorities to strengthen the protection of the 
EU’s financial interests through coordinated implementation of national legislation, 
policies and action plans to manage irregularities, including the fight against corruption 
and fraud, preventing and managing conflicts of interest, and protecting persons who 
report breaches of EU law. 
Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions 
Albania has some level of preparation in the area of financial and budgetary provisions. 
Limited progress was made on alignment with the EU acquis in the underlying policy fields 
that affect the functioning of the EU funding system. Methodological improvements 
continued on alignment with European system of accounts (ESA) 2010 standards. There 
were some limited improvements to the data transmission of the excessive deficit 
procedure (EDP) and government finance statistics (GFS) tables. However, data remains 
marked as non-publishable. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ continue aligning data on national accounts to ESA 2010 and improve the 
comprehensiveness of data transmission to Eurostat, including on the EDP and 
government finance statistics, as well as transparency by removing the flag non-
publishable; 
→ align its legislation with EU rules on VAT and customs duties and strengthen efforts to 
tackle tax evasion and informality; 
→ improve administrative capacity and coordination mechanisms among key stakeholders 
in the own-resources system. 
 
CLUSTER 6: EXTERNAL RELATIONS 
Chapter 30: External relations 
Albania has a good level of preparation in external relations. Some progress was made 
during the reporting period, in particular by adopting and implementing the Central European 
Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) protocols and through efforts to develop its export control 
system. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Albania should in particular: 
→ continue to implement CEFTA Additional Protocol 5 on Trade Facilitation, Additional 
Protocol 6 on Trade in Services, and Additional Protocol 7 on Dispute Settlement, and 
implement actions under the new Common Regional Market action plan for 2025-2028; 
→ align the national legislation on the screening of foreign investments with the EU FDI 
 
20 
 
Screening Regulation and ensure full alignment of domestic legislation with the EU 
Regulation on dual-use goods; 
→ set up the legal framework covering international cooperation and development policy 
and humanitarian aid, in line with EU policies and principles. 
Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy 
Albania has a good level of preparation in the field of foreign, security and defence policy. 
The country continued to make good progress, maintaining its full alignment with relevant 
High Representative statements on behalf of the EU and relevant Council decisions, 
including EU restrictive measures. In December 2024, the EU-Albania Security and Defence 
Partnership was signed. Albania also stepped up its participation in EU crisis management 
missions and operations under the common security and defence policy (CSDP). 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented. In the coming year, 
Albania should in particular: 
→ maintain full alignment with the EU’s common foreign and security policy and 
strengthen its capacity to enforce restrictive measures; 
→ consider further increasing its participation in EU crisis management missions and 
operations; 
→ adopt a new national small arms and light weapons (SALW) strategy aligned with the 
revised Roadmap for the control of SALW in the Western Balkans (2025-2030). 
 
1.3. STATE OF PLAY OF THE ACCESSION NEGOTIATIONS 
Following the second intergovernmental conference of 15 October 2024 that opened 
accession negotiations on cluster 1 – fundamentals, four intergovernmental conferences 
were convened leading to the opening of negotiations on four clusters. 
Clusters 
Chapters/areas 
Date cluster opened/chapter 
closed  
1. Fundamentals 
All chapters open 
23-Judiciary and fundamental rights 
24-Justice, freedom, security 
5-Public procurement 
18-Statistics 
32-Financial control 
…Economic criteria 
…Functioning of democratic institutions 
…Public administration reform (PAR) 
Cluster opened on 15 October 
2024  
2. Internal Market 
 
All chapters open 
1-Free movement of goods 
2-Freedom 
of 
movement 
for 
workers  
3-Right 
of 
establishment 
and 
freedom to establish services 
4-Free movement of capital 
6-Company law 
7-Intellectual property rights 
8-Competition 
9-Financial services 
28-Consumer and health protection 
Cluster opened on 14 April 2025