3 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION  
1.1. 
Context  
Albania has continued to implement the Stabilisation and Association Agreement and the 
meetings of the joint bodies under the agreement took place.  
On 25 March 2020, the Council decided – and the members of the European Council 
endorsed this decision1 – to open accession negotiations with Albania. The Council tasked the 
Commission to report on a number of issues to be addressed by Albania prior to the first 
Inter-governmental Conference on accession negotiations.  
Overall, and despite the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, Albania has continued 
to show its commitment to EU oriented reforms and delivered tangible and sustainable 
results. It has fulfilled all the conditions set out in the Council Conclusions of March 2020 for 
the first Inter-governmental Conference.  
In October 2020, the Commission adopted the enlargement package2 and assessed that the 
condition related to the functioning of the Constitutional Court was close to being met, while 
all the other conditions to be fulfilled prior to the holding of the first Inter-Governmental 
Conference on accession negotiations were met. The Constitutional Court regained 
functionality in December 2020. Meanwhile, Albania has continued to meet all other 
conditions and has made further considerable, steady progress in addressing the other 
priorities highlighted by the Council. 
The COVID-19 pandemic continued throughout the reporting period. By early October 2021, 
Albania had recorded 171,794 cases and over 2,710 deaths due to the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The Commission has redirected EUR 50.6 million in grants to meet the most immediate 
needs and provide a socio-economic response to the pandemic. The Commission also 
provided macro-financial assistance of EUR 180 million through a very favourable loan; the 
first instalment (EUR 90 million) was disbursed in March 2021. 
Together with the donation of medical equipment, the continued delivery of EU-funded 
vaccines is a tangible sign of EU solidarity. Albania has a countrywide vaccination strategy. 
Around 26% of the population was fully vaccinated by early September. It received 143,910 
Pfizer/BioNTech doses from the EU between May and August 2021, facilitated by Austria 
and funded by the EU4Health grant, and EU Member States delivered 310,000 doses by end 
September 2021. The EU supported COVAX initiative also delivered over 143,400 doses to 
Albania in the same period.  
 
1.2. 
SUMMARY OF THE REPORT3 4 
As regards the political criteria, general elections were held on 25 April 2021, following the 
cross-party agreement of 5 June 2020 that led to a wide-ranging electoral reform, in line with 
                                                          
1 https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-7002-2020-INIT/en/pdf and 
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/meetings/european-council/2020/03/26/ 
2 COM(2020)660final of 6.10.2020 and SWD(2020)354final of 6.10.2020 
3 This report covers the period from June 2020 to June 2021. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from the government of Albania, the EU Member States, European Parliament reports 
and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also includes the results of 
comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of law. 
4 For the state of play the report uses the following assessment scales: early stage, some level of preparation, 
moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. For progress made during the reporting 
period, the following scale has been used: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, good 
progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, also interim steps have been used. 
 
4 
 
OSCE/ODIHR recommendations. Electronic identification of voters was implemented in 
97% of polling stations, while e-voting and e-counting was piloted successfully in 32 polling 
stations in Tirana. The OSCE/ODIHR final assessment found that elections were generally 
well organised. The new electoral administration gained the trust of most stakeholders. 
Concerns remained related to the misuse of public resources or official functions, to 
allegations of vote buying, and to the leaking of sensitive personal data covering the political 
preferences of citizens. These cases are being investigated. Parliament continued to work 
under the restrictions brought in due to the pandemic. With regard to EU oriented reforms, 
Parliament adopted a number of significant pieces of legislation, in areas such as asylum, the 
population census, and the efficiency of the judiciary. Throughout the reporting period, the 
government maintained a focus on reforms required for the country’s path towards the EU, 
despite the challenge of addressing the negative social and economic impact of the COVID-
19 pandemic. In the new legislature, the majority and the opposition will need to improve 
political dialogue and work together with all parts of society to further advance the EU 
reform agenda and accession negotiations. Coordination within the administration needs to be 
improved, notably regarding EU integration. The territorial administrative reform should be 
further consolidated as part of the wider decentralisation agenda. This is particularly 
necessary to guarantee local fiscal autonomy and empower municipalities to provide good 
quality public services. Limited progress has been made to implement the roadmap on 
creating an enabling environment for civil society. Nonetheless, Albanian civil society has 
been able to provide support and services to most vulnerable people affected by the COVID-
19 pandemic.   
Albania is moderately prepared with the reform of its public administration. Some progress 
was made in building capacity in line ministries to implement regulatory impact assessments, 
adopting guidelines for public consultations, setting up the IT systems for integrated 
planning, increasing the implementation rate of the National European Integration Plan, 
increasing the number of e-services, and completing the testing phase to automate the payroll 
system. Implementation of the 2015-2022 public administration reform (PAR) and the 2014-
2022 public financial management (PFM) reform strategies has continued despite the impact 
of the pandemic.  
Albania’s judicial system is also moderately prepared. Albania has continued to implement 
the comprehensive justice reform, resulting in good progress. In particular, it reached an 
important milestone at the end of 2020, with the appointment of three new judges to the 
Constitutional Court. With seven judges in office, the Constitutional Court regained its 
necessary quorum of minimum six members to hold plenary sessions, thus being fully 
operational and meeting the related outstanding condition for the first IGC, which continues 
to be fulfilled. The Constitutional Court has started to fully exercise its functions, including 
by adjudicating on constitutional disputes between state institutions about respective 
competences. Progress also continued on High Court appointments.  The High Court regained 
its quorum in March 2020. With the promotion by the High Judicial Council of six new 
judges in March and July 2021 it has reached nine sitting judges, which make it fully 
operational - a condition for the first IGC, which continues to be fulfilled. Further 
appointments to the High Court are expected. The Parliament adopted amendments to ten 
laws aiming to further strengthen the efficiency of the judicial system and its capacity to 
tackle corruption and organised crime. 
The temporary re-evaluation of all judges and prosecutors (vetting process) has advanced 
steadily, continuing to deliver tangible results - a condition for the first IGC, which continues 
to be fulfilled. Under the aegis of the European Commission, the International Monitoring 
Operation has continued to oversee the process. As of 15 September 2021 the vetting 
 
5 
 
institutions had completed 437 cases at first instance, including all priority files. Of the 437 
decisions, 298 are final (i.e. after appeal). Overall, 62 % of the vetting files processed so far 
have resulted in dismissals and terminations largely due to resignations by the assessees. The 
vetting institutions are expected to continue to refer to the prosecution services all cases 
where there are indications of criminal offences. 
The Specialised Structure for Anti-Corruption and Organised Crime (SPAK), 
comprising the Special Prosecution Office (SPO) and the National Bureau of 
Investigation (NBI), are operational - a condition for the first IGC, which continues to be 
fulfilled. While the 2021 budget foresees the appointment of 20 prosecutors, the SPO has 
reached the first target of 15 prosecutors, including the Chief Special Prosecutor. The first 
round of recruitment for NBI investigators resulted in the appointment of 28 investigators, 
who, after an intense training programme, are now operational. A second round to recruit an 
additional 32 investigators was opened in April 2021 and is expected to be concluded before 
the end of the year.  
Albania has some level of preparation in the fight against corruption. It made some 
progress in strengthening the fight against corruption - a condition for the first IGC, which 
continues to be fulfilled. Overall, the implementation of the Inter-sectoral Strategy against 
Corruption is on track. Although the vetting of the members of the judiciary is an 
administrative process, it is yielding results in the fight against corruption as judges and 
prosecutors dismissed, as a result of vetting, are brought to justice. Albania has made further 
efforts to create a solid track record in the fight against corruption, although it remains an 
objective that requires political will and further structured and consistent actions. Convictions 
in cases involving high-level officials still remain limited, fostering a culture of impunity 
within the higher levels of the State. The specialised structures against anti-corruption (SPAK 
and the anti-corruption and organised crime courts) should significantly strengthen the 
country’s overall capacity to investigate and prosecute corruption. Overall, corruption is 
prevalent in many areas of public and business life and remains an issue of serious concern.  
Albania has some level of preparation in the fight against organised crime. It made good 
progress to meet last year’s recommendations. It achieved tangible results in the fight against 
organised crime, including by stepping up cooperation with EU Members States and Europol 
- a condition for the first IGC, which continues to be fulfilled. The country continued to 
implement the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) Action Plan to improve effectiveness in 
the field of anti-money laundering and the package of temporary preventive measures to 
boost its capacity to counter criminal organisations (Operation Force of Law) throughout the 
year. Exchange of qualitative information and joint police operations involving international 
partners further intensified. Albania has continued to show its commitment to counter the 
production and trafficking of drugs, as air monitoring by EU member state law enforcement 
services has continued. The new specialised system against organised crime and corruption 
enables reinforced cooperation between police and prosecution services. Financial 
investigations need to accompany systematically criminal proceedings. Efforts need to 
continue to increase the number of prosecutions and final convictions, especially at high-
level. Albania adopted a new national cross-sector counter-terrorism strategy and action 
plan in December 2020 and made very good progress in implementing the bilateral 
arrangement with the EU on operationalising the Joint Action Plan on counter-terrorism for 
the Western Balkans. More efforts are needed to tackle cybercrime, trafficking in human 
beings and money laundering cases.  
On fundamental rights, Albania complies with international human rights instruments and 
has ratified most international conventions related to the protection of fundamental rights. 
 
6 
 
Albania has pursued efforts to meet its obligations under these instruments. As regards the 
adoption of the remaining implementing legislation related to the 2017 framework law on the 
protection of national minorities, it adopted an additional by-law on minority education in 
December 2020, which brought the number of adopted by-laws to eight. The remaining 
implementing legislation, including on self-identification and use of minority languages, has 
yet to be adopted. Efforts are ongoing to implement a comprehensive land sector reform and 
to consolidate property rights. A population census law was adopted. Albania has some level 
of preparation / is moderately prepared in the area of freedom of expression. There was no 
progress over the reporting period. The atmosphere of verbal attacks, smear campaigns and 
acts of intimidation against journalists has not improved. Tensions between political actors 
and journalists have increased during the COVID-19 crisis and in the context of the 
parliamentary elections. The reported attacks against journalists have not resulted in any final 
convictions. Self-regulation in online media needs to be ensured. Steps to make the audio-
visual regulatory authority fully operational need to be taken in a way that ensures its 
independence and legitimacy. The public service broadcaster’s independence, professional 
standards and financial sustainability need to be strengthened. Following the unfavourable 
opinion of the Venice Commission and wide criticism on draft amendments to the media law 
aimed at regulating online media and some aspects of defamation, representatives from the 
ruling majority publicly committed to ensure that any new legislation on media would be in 
line with the Venice Commission recommendations and submitted to consultation with media 
organisations. The government reconsidered the matter and the Assembly did not revert to the 
issue. The parliament and government resulting from the 25 April elections must uphold the 
commitment to ensure that any possible changes to the media law would be in line with the 
Venice Commission Opinion and submitted to proper consultations. On gender equality, the 
implementation of the national strategy and action plan 2016-2020 on gender equality was 
hampered by a persistent funding gap.  A new strategy on gender equality 2021-2030 was 
adopted in June 2021. Albania should make efforts to ensure adequate state funding to 
implement it at central and local levels. Efforts are also required to ensure that all national 
strategies at central and local level are gender mainstreamed and apply gender responsive 
budgeting. 
On migration, the legal framework on migration is largely aligned with the EU acquis but 
needs updating in line with recent developments. In February 2021, Albania adopted a new 
law on asylum. Strategies on an integrated border management and on the diaspora were 
adopted in 2020.  Implementation of the national migration strategy and action plan for 2019-
2022 as continued, providing a clear framework for managing and coordinating migration 
flows and the Commission has issued four monitoring reports. Despite border closure during 
March-May 2020, Albania continued to experience a growing influx of irregular migrants, 
mostly from Greece and leaving Albania after a few days, on the way to other EU countries. 
The number of irregular migrants apprehended in Albania in 2020 increased by 13% 
compared with 2019.  
The number of Albanian citizens lodging asylum requests in EU Member States decreased 
by 66% in 2020 compared to 2019, from 20,415 to 6,935 applications, according to Eurostat 
data. The COVID-19 pandemic contributed in large part to this sharp decrease, but it can be 
noted that the average decrease of applications from the rest of the world to the EU is much 
smaller (-33%). The ‘recognition rate’ in 2020 was around 4.4% compared with 5.3% in 
2019. Since applications peaked in 2017 in the most affected Member State, the number of 
applications has fallen from 12,130 in 2017 to 2,985 in 2020. Three Albanian police liaison 
officers are deployed in the EU and a liaison officer from the EU works in Tirana to help with 
exit checks. The issue of Albanian nationals making unfounded asylum applications to EU 
 
7 
 
Member States and Schengen-associated countries still requires substantial efforts from the 
Albanian authorities. In addition to information campaigns, thorough border checks, 
awareness-raising on rights and obligations under the visa-free regime, identifying and 
addressing the underlying reasons, dialogue and cooperation with the countries most affected 
have continued. The Commission is monitoring the trend very closely in the framework of 
the post-visa liberalisation monitoring mechanism. 
As regards the economic criteria, Albania made some progress and is moderately prepared 
in terms of developing a functioning market economy. Hit by the double shock from the 
earthquake of November 2019 and the COVID-19 pandemic, GDP contracted in 2020, 
although by less than initially expected. The pandemic-related domestic lockdown and 
international travel restrictions caused significant losses for the tourism and manufacturing 
sectors, but the economy started to rebound in the second half of the year. Within the limited 
fiscal and monetary policy space available, the government and the central bank took swift 
and appropriate actions to support business, households and the health sector. This cushioned 
the impact on the labour market and maintained macroeconomic and financial sector stability. 
It also pushed up the public debt and deficit ratios and increased the country’s vulnerability to 
external shocks. Dealing with the double shock stretched the capacity of the administration, 
but it largely maintained business continuity, and work continued on most ongoing reforms 
and legislative initiatives.   
Albania made some progress and has some level of preparation in its capacity to cope with 
competitive pressure and market forces within the EU. It has made improvements on 
energy and transport infrastructure, the use of digital communication and on education 
outcomes, but significant gaps remain in comparison to its regional and European peers. 
Albania’s competitiveness is hindered by a lack of entrepreneurial and technological know-
how, significant levels of informality, unmet investment needs in human and physical capital, 
and low spending on R&D. Pre-existing and significant gaps in skills and education have 
probably widened due to COVID-19 related lockdowns and distance learning, which is not 
accessible to all. Regional integration and exports increased, but remained below potential. 
The lack of product and geographical diversification in Albania’s exports compound its 
vulnerability to external shocks. 
On public procurement, where Albania is moderately prepared, the country has made good 
progress, in particular by adopting the new law on public procurement. On statistics, where 
Albania is also moderately prepared, it made some progress on aligning with ESA 2010 
standards, faster publication, and the adoption of the Population Census Law. Albania is 
moderately prepared in most areas on financial control, where the country made some 
progress, notably on public internal financial control and external audit. 
Albania is moderately prepared in most of the areas of the internal market, namely the free 
movement of goods, services and capital, competition policy, and financial services.  It has 
made some progress in particular by adopting a law on compulsory insurance in transport and 
in further aligning its banking legislation, but the State Aid Commission needs to be made 
independent and sufficiently resourced. Preparations are at an early stage on consumer and 
health protection, as the country made no progress on health outside its COVID-19 response. 
Albania needs to implement the One Health approach and to ensure that everyone has quality 
healthcare coverage. This policy cluster is key for Albania’s preparations to meet the 
requirements of the EU’s internal market and is of high relevance for early integration and 
the development of the Common Regional Market. 
Albania has achieved a moderate level of preparation in many areas linked to 
competitiveness and inclusive growth, namely information society and media, taxation, 
 
8 
 
economic and monetary policy, enterprise and industrial policy, education and culture, and 
the customs union. The country has some level of preparation in social policy and 
employment, and in science and research. Albania has made some progress in particular with 
the Smart Specialisation Strategy and in its participation in the Horizon 2020 research 
programme, but progress was limited on economic and monetary policy and customs union 
during the reporting period. Socio-economic reforms must be pursued to help address the 
existing structural weaknesses, low competitiveness, high unemployment, and the impact of 
the pandemic.  
Albania is moderately prepared in most areas related to the Green Agenda and sustainable 
connectivity, namely the trans-European networks, energy, and environment and climate 
change. It has some level of preparation in the area of transport policy. The country has made 
some progress in most areas in particular through revised transport planning and energy 
connectivity. More efforts are needed to improve the performance of ships under the 
Albanian flag and to enforce energy and environmental legislation, not least in the protected 
areas. The green transition and sustainable connectivity are key to economic integration 
within the region and with the European Union, facilitating cross-border trade within the 
region and creating real benefits for businesses and citizens. This cluster and the reforms 
concerned have significant links to Albania’s Economic Reform Programme, the 
Commission’s Economic and Investment Plan and the Green Agenda for the Western 
Balkans endorsed by Albania in December 2020.  
Albania has some level of preparation in most areas linked to resources, agriculture and 
cohesion, namely agriculture and rural development, food safety, veterinary and 
phytosanitary policy, fisheries, and financial and budgetary provisions. It is moderately 
prepared as regards regional policy and coordination of structural instruments. Albania has 
made good progress in the area of fisheries, having reactivated the vessel monitoring system 
(VMS). It has made some progress on financial and budgetary provisions, on agriculture and 
rural development, and food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy, but the farm register 
needs to be set up. It has made limited progress on regional policy and the coordination of 
structural funding instruments. In this respect, inter-agency coordination for pre-accession 
assistance needs improvement, and issues need to be addressed as regards strategic planning, 
implementation and monitoring capacity of infrastructure projects under the Economic and 
Investment Plan.  
Albania has reached a good level of preparation as regards external relations, foreign 
security and defence.  As regards the external relations chapter of negotiations, Albania 
made good progress and reached a good level of preparation, not least by adopting and 
ratifying additional protocols to the Central European Free Trade Agreement and by 
certifying first authorised economic operators (AEO). It has worked on extending the Green 
Lanes/Corridors with EU Member States. The country has also delivered policy measures on 
humanitarian aid and on development aid. The country held a successful chairmanship of 
CEFTA. As regards the EU’s Common Foreign and Security Policy, it continued to maintain 
full alignment with all relevant EU decisions and declarations. The country held the OSCE’s 
chairmanship-in-office in 2020, demonstrating its commitment to multilateral cooperation. 
Albania continued to participate in EU crisis-management missions and operations. 
2. 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
2.1. 
FUNCTIONING OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 
REFORM 
2.1.1  Democracy