3 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION  
1.1. 
Context  
Albania has continued to implement the Stabilisation and Association Agreement and the 
meetings of the joint bodies under the agreement took place.  
Albania has continued to maintain overall focus on the EU reform agenda, despite the challenge 
of addressing the economic and social consequences of the triple shock of the 2019 earthquake, 
the pandemic and of the Russian war of aggression against Ukraine. It has continued to meet all 
the conditions set out in the Council Conclusions of March 2020 for the first Inter-governmental 
Conference1. On 19 July, the Intergovernmental Conference on accession negotiations took place 
with Albania. The Commission immediately launched the screening process. 
Albania’s maintained its record of full alignment with the EU’s common foreign and security 
policy (CFSP). As a non-permanent member since January 2022, Albania has been actively 
engaged in the UN Security Council as a co-penholder of resolutions condemning the aggression, 
thus aligning with the EU position when co-sponsoring and voting on UN resolutions on Russia's 
invasion of Ukraine and its humanitarian impact, and also when voting on the suspension of 
Russia in the Human Rights Council. Albania’s stance is a strong signal of its strategic choice of 
EU accession and of its role as a reliable partner. 
1.2. 
SUMMARY OF THE REPORT2  
As regards the political criteria, in the new legislature, resulting from the 2021 elections, which 
were held following the cross-party agreement of 5 June 2020 the elected members from the 
largest opposition parties took their seats in parliament. The parliament elected the new President 
of the Republic. Internal conflict within the largest opposition party (DP), affected parliamentary 
life. On EU oriented reforms, parliament passed a time-limited constitutional extension of the 
vetting bodies mandate and nine laws aimed at alignment with the EU acquis. The government 
maintained a focus on reforms related to the country’s EU path and reinforced its coordination 
structure for EU integration, but it needs to further advance the EU reform agenda, together with 
the opposition and all segments of society. The establishment of several government agencies 
around the Prime Minister’s Office, without a comprehensive steering framework and without a 
systematic attention to oversight and reporting lines, raises questions in relation to the standards 
of public administration. A new decentralisation strategy beyond 2022, remains to be adopted 
and upstream consultation at local level will be essential. Despite funding improvements, limited 
progress was made to implement the roadmap on creating an enabling environment for civil 
society. 
                                                            
1 https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-7002-2020-INIT/en/pdf and 
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/meetings/european-council/2020/03/26/ 
2 This report covers the period from June 2021 to June 2022. It is based on input from a variety of sources, including 
contributions from the government of Albania, the EU Member States, European Parliament reports and information 
from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also includes the results of comparative 
assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of law. 
The report uses the following assessment scales to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of preparation, 
moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made during the reporting 
period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, good progress and very 
good progress. Where appropriate, also interim steps have been used. 
 
4 
 
Albania is moderately prepared in the area of public administration reform. It made limited 
progress in strengthening line ministries’ capacity to implement regulatory impact assessments 
and hold public consultations. It started preparations for the salary reform and expanded the 
automated payroll system. Implementation of the 2015-2022 public administration reform and 
the 2014-2022 public financial management reform strategies continued. The IT systems for 
integrated planning are not yet fully functional. However, bodies subordinate to ministries 
(agencies) continued to be created without a comprehensive steering framework, systematic 
attention to oversight or clear reporting lines. They also further exacerbated the issue of tasks 
entrusted to staff hired under the Labour Code, instead of to civil servants. Provisions on merit-
based recruitment in the civil service law remain to be fully implemented, especially for senior 
level positions. The number of provided online services continued to increase, but this also raises 
questions about equitable access for citizens with limited digital skills.  
Albania’s judicial system has reached a moderate level of preparation. Comprehensive justice 
reform continued, resulting in good progress overall. Two new judges were appointed to the 
Constitutional Court in March and September 2022, further improving the court’s ability to carry 
out its mandate. There was also progress with the High Court, which now has 15 sitting judges, 
enabling it to reduce the case backlog for the first time in six years, to start unifying the case law 
and to appoint judges to the Constitutional Court. Further appointments to the High Court are 
expected. However, long proceedings, a low clearance rate and a large case backlog continue to 
negatively impact the efficiency of the judicial system. To tackle these problems, a new judicial 
map was adopted following consultations. Additional efforts are still required to put it into effect, 
as well as to improve the case management system and the training system for magistrates.  
The temporary re-evaluation of all judges and prosecutors (the vetting process) has continued to 
advance steadily. Under the aegis of the European Commission, the International Monitoring 
Operation has continued to oversee the process independently. By 12 September, the vetting 
institutions had completed 554 first-instance cases. Around 64% of the vetting dossiers 
processed so far resulted in dismissals, resignations or the termination of mandate of vetted 
magistrates. The vetting institutions must continue to refer cases to the prosecution services 
where there are indications of criminal offences. 
The Specialised Structure for Anti-Corruption and Organised Crime (SPAK), comprising 
the Special Prosecution Office (SPO) and the National Bureau of Investigation (NBI), continued 
its operations. After a budget increase in 2021, the SPO now has 17 prosecutors in place, the 
recruitment of eight financial investigators is underway and the NBI reached its full operational 
capacity of 60 investigators after a second round of recruitment.  
Albania has some level of preparation in the fight against corruption. It continued its efforts to 
build on its track record of investigation, prosecutions and convictions in the fight against 
corruption and delivered some results. These efforts need to continue. However,  greater political 
will, further structured efforts, and adequate resources and skills remain necessary. The SPAK 
Court delivered several important final decisions on high-ranking state officials, including a 
former Minister of the Interior and a former Prosecutor General. Although the vetting of 
members of the judiciary is an administrative process, it continues to bring results in the fight 
against corruption within the judiciary. A new General Anti-Corruption Directorate was created 
in the Ministry of Justice. Overall, despite some progress, corruption remains an area of serious 
concern. Increasing the number of final convictions of high-level officials remains an important 
 
5 
 
priority to further tackle a culture of impunity. The sectors that are most vulnerable to corruption 
require targeted risk assessment and dedicated measures. 
Albania has some level of preparation in the fight against organised crime. It made some 
progress in meeting last year’s recommendations. Strong and fruitful cooperation with EU 
Members States, Europol and Eurojust has led to tangible results. Albania continued to show 
commitment to counter the production and trafficking of cannabis. Good progress was made on 
the seizure and confiscation of assets related to organised crime. This effort must continue in the 
future. Efforts also need to continue to ensure increased prosecutions and final convictions, 
especially at high-level. Countering cybercrime, trafficking in human beings and money 
laundering remain areas in which additional results are needed. The phenomenon of child sexual 
abuse online remains a concern. The country progressed steadily in the implementation of  the 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) Action Plan to improve effectiveness in the field of anti-
money laundering, but Albania remained on the list of jurisdictions under increased monitoring. 
Financial investigations need to accompany systematically criminal proceedings. Albania 
adopted a new national cross-sector counter-terrorism strategy and action plan in December 
2020. 
On fundamental rights, Albania complies overall with international human rights instruments 
and has ratified most international conventions on the protection of fundamental rights. Some 
progress was made in using alternatives to detentions and, in particular, in developing the 
probation service, which remains fully operational, including for juvenile offenders. Albania 
adopted a new lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and queer (LGBTIQ) action plan, 
which includes measures to fight discrimination, improve access to services and approve the 
legal gender recognition law and a national action plan for equality, inclusion and participation 
of Roma and Egyptians. Enhanced efforts to consolidate property rights through the registration 
and digitalisation of cadastral data are needed and the sector remains prone to corruption, while 
the compensation process has stalled. On the protection of national minorities, Albania adopted a 
new piece of implementing legislation that creates a fund for civil society projects in support of 
minority rights. However, adoption of the remaining implementing legislation, including on 
freedom to self-identify as a member of a national minority and on the use of minority 
languages, is still pending. Preparations for the long awaited population and housing census 
continued, including with pilot censuses in minority population areas, however the census was 
postponed to 2023. Further actions need to be taken to strenghten data protection and align 
national legislation with the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).  
Albania has some level of preparation/is moderately prepared in the area of freedom of 
expression. No progress was made in the reporting period. The intersection of business and 
political interests continued to hamper media independence and the quality of journalism. 
Disinformation including smear campaigns are recurrent, especially in online media whose self-
regulation needs to be ensured. The atmosphere of verbal attacks, smear campaigns and acts of 
intimidation against journalists has not improved. Any changes to the Media Law need to be in 
line with the Venice Commission opinion and must be submitted for consultation with media 
organisations. It remains important to ensure that the media have direct and transparent  access to 
governmental institutions and their activivities. The regulatory performance of the Audio-visual 
Regulatory Authority (AMA) needs to be improved and the independence and resources of the 
public service broadcaster should be strenghtened.  
 
6 
 
Albania adopted a new and better-budgeted national strategy on gender equality and continues 
its efforts to ensure adequate state funding to implement it at central and local level. Efforts are 
needed to ensure that all national strategies at central and local level are gender mainstreamed 
and spend budget in ways that take geneder into account. On citizenship, Albania should refrain 
from developing an investors’ citizenship scheme (golden passports) as it would pose risks as 
regards security, money laundering, tax evasion, terrorist financing, corruption and infiltration by 
organised crime, and would be incompatible with the EU acquis. 
On migration, the legal framework on migration is largely aligned with the EU acquis but needs 
updating, and must provide a clear framework for managing and coordinating migration. The 
number of irregular migrants apprehended in Albania in 2021 decreased by about 15% compared 
with 2020. No progress was made in referrals to asylum procedure and the implementation of 
return procedures in line with the legal framework. Albania’s visa policy should be aligned with 
the EU one. 
The number of Albanian citizens lodging asylum requests in EU Member States. remains  
lower than the peak of 2015, but increased sygnificantly in the summer of 2021, and thus still 
requires continuous and sustained efforts. Dialogue and cooperation with the countries most 
affected have continued, in addition to thorough border checks and awareness-raising on rights 
and obligations under the visa-free regime. Albania should keep addressing the phenomenon of 
unaccompanied minors. The Commission is monitoring the trend very closely in the framework 
of the post-visa liberalisation monitoring mechanism. 
On the economic criteria, Albania made good progress and is moderately prepared for 
developing a functioning market economy. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the 
economy, the budget deficit and the public debt ratio were lower than expected, but Russia’s war 
against Ukraine caused price increases and lower trade. Fiscal space remains limited. Revenue-
related reforms progressed, but investment expenditure remains weak. Frequent budget revisions 
weaken fiscal credibility. Inflation increased above target. Increased public service digitalisation, 
financial inclusion, and labour inspections benefitted the business environment and the 
formalisation of the economy, but the informal economy remains significant. Public consultation 
remains weak. Albania made some progress and is at some level of preparation to cope with 
competitive pressure and market forces within the EU. Energy and transport infrastructure, 
digitalisation and education improved, but entrepreneurial and technological know-how remain 
low, with unmet investment needs in human and physical capital, skills and education gaps, and 
low R&D spending. Low export diversification increases vulnerability to external shocks. 
Regional integration and exports increased but remained below potential.  
On public procurement, Albania is moderately prepared, the country has made good progress, 
in particular by adopting further implementing legislation and launching an electronic appeals 
and complaint system. On statistics, Albania is also moderately prepared, it made limited 
progress on aligning with ESA 2010 standards, faster publication and transmission to Eurostat, 
but the Population Census Law has been further postponed. Albania is moderately prepared in 
most areas on financial control, where the country made some progress, notably on public 
internal financial control and internal audit. 
Albania is moderately prepared in most of the areas of the internal market, namely the free 
movement of goods, services and capital, company law and competition policy. The same 
applies to financial services and to intellectual property law, both chapters where the country has 
 
7 
 
made good progress thanks to the reduction of non-performing loans and to the adoption of 
legislation on copyright and on industrial property rights. Albania has made some progress with 
the adoption of a new law on foreigners as well as by fulfiling some of the recommendations of 
the Moneyval report. However, in the area of competition policy, the State aid authority needs to 
be made independent and sufficiently resourced. Preparations are at an early stage on consumer 
and health protection, where the country made limited progress. 
Albania has achieved a moderate level of preparation in many areas linked to competitiveness 
and inclusive growth, namely digital transformation and media, taxation, economic and 
monetary policy, enterprise and industrial policy, education and culture. The same goes for the 
customs union, where the pan-Euro-Mediterranean area rules of origin are applied, and bodies 
involved in the fight against smuggling and counterfeit goods are strengthened and cooperate 
better. The adoption of a tax and criminal amnesty against the advice of the EU and Moneyval 
could jeopardise progress in this area as well as in the fight against money laundering. Albania 
has some level of preparation in social policy and employment, and research and innovation. 
Albania has made some progress in education in particular with the adoption of the new National 
Strategy for Education and Action Plan 2021-2026, but progress was limited on the economic 
and monetary policy.  
As regards Green Agenda and sustainable connectivity, Albania is moderately prepared on 
energy, environment and climate change. It has some level of preparation in the areas of 
transport policy and of trans-European networks and some progress was achieved in developing 
transport and energy networks. It made progress on civil protection and is ready to join the 
Union Civil Protection Mechanism. The country has made limited progress in the other areas 
covered by this cluster and ongoing efforts to address issues with vessels Flag State Control and 
to align legislation need to continue. Limited progress was made in further aligning the EU 
acquis on water management, chemicals and environmental crime .The impact of strategic 
investments on biodiversity and nature protection requires attention. This cluster and the reforms 
concerned have significant links to Albania’s Economic Reform Programme, the Commission’s 
Economic and Investment Plan and the Green Agenda for the Western Balkans endorsed by 
Albania in December 2020.  
Albania has some level of preparation in most areas linked to resources, agriculture and 
cohesion, namely agriculture and rural development, food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary 
policy, fisheries, and financial and budgetary provisions. It is moderately prepared as regards 
regional policy and coordination of structural instruments. Albania has made some progress in 
agriculture and rural development, notably with the establishment of a farm register and better 
administrative capacity for rural development. Good progress was observed on fisheries, with the 
continued operationalisation of the Vessel Monitoring System (VMS) and allocation of human 
resources to monitor and report on the activities of fishing vessels. Albania as a contracting party 
of the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean (GFCM) is fully implementing 
fishing effort recommendations. Some progress was made on financial and budgetary provisions. 
Progress was however limited on food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy, on regional 
policy and coordination of structural instruments. In this respect, inter-agency coordination for 
pre-accession assistance needs improvement, and issues need to be addressed as regards strategic 
planning, implementation and monitoring capacity of infrastructure projects under the Economic 
and Investment Plan.  
 
8 
 
Albania has reached a good level of preparation as regards external relations, foreign security 
and defence.  On the external relations chapter of negotiations, Albania made some progress as 
it continued alignment of legislation in the field of dual use goods and to implement CEFTA 
additional protocols. As regards the EU’s Common Foreign and Security Policy, Albania 
maintained full alignment with all relevant EU decisions and declarations, including with the EU 
restrictive measures following Russia’s unprovoked aggression against Ukraine. As a non-
permanent member since January 2022, Albania has been actively engaged in the UN Security 
Council in promoting and defending the rules-based international order. 
2. CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
2.1. FUNCTIONING OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION REFORM  
2.1.1 Democracy 
In the new Assembly, resulting from the 2021 general elections, which were held following the 
cross-party agreement of 5 June 2020, the elected members from the largest opposition parties to 
parliament took their seats in Parliament. With the gradual improvement of the pandemic 
situation, parliament slowly returned to in-person meetings. As regards EU-related reforms, the 
Assembly reached cross-party consensus on constitutional amendments to extend the term of the 
judicial vetting bodies. The Assembly also elected the new President with the votes of the 
majority. The deep division within the largest opposition Democratic Party, dominated the 
political environment and has hampered legislative work, such as furthering electoral reform.  
Elections 
On February 2022, the Parliament decided to set up an ad hoc parliamentary committee on 
electoral reform, which is meant to follow-up on OSCE/ODIHR recommendations for the April 
2021 elections and had a term of six months. The committee was constituted on 17 June. At the 
expiry of its term in August 2022, it had only held its constitutive meeting.  
During the reporting period, the Constitutional Court ruled against a provision of the Electoral 
Code according to which electoral subjects need to pass a national threshold of 1% in order to 
enter parliament, arguing that it discriminates against independent candidates. Earlier, the 
Constitutional Court had ruled to abrogate the provision related to the distribution of 
parliamentary seats in view of the preferential vote. The impending electoral reform will need to 
address these decisions. 
In line with ODIHR recommendations, the Central Election Commission has continued efforts to 
strengthen its oversight role over campaign financing. In addition, the CEC has initiated high-
level discussions on the implementation of out-of-country vote. 
On 6 March 2022, Albania held by-elections in six municipalities. The President of the Republic 
decreed by-elections on 20 January, after a ruling of the Constitutional Court on the validity of 
the 2019 local elections. Vacancies were created in the municipalities of Shkoder, Vore and 
Lushnje after the mayors were discharged, in application of the law on the integrity of elected 
officials. In Durres and Diber the mayors had resigned, and in Rrogozhine the mayor had passed 
away. Eleven political parties registered to take part in the by-elections, fielding 19 candidates, 
out of which three were women. Electronic voting and counting was piloted in one municipality 
and biometric identification of voters was implemented in all polling stations. The ruling 
Socialist Party won five municipalities, while a coalition of two opposition parties won the