3 
 
1.  
INTRODUCTION 
1.1.  
CONTEXT 
The first Inter-Governmental Conference on accession negotiations with Albania took place 
on 19 July 2022. The first step in the accession negotiations process, the analytical 
examination of the EU acquis or the ‘screening’, was launched on the same date and has 
progressed smoothly. Albania has continued to implement the Stabilisation and Association 
Agreement and the meetings of the joint bodies under the agreement have taken place at 
regular intervals.  
The EU accession negotiation process with Albania is conducted in line with the revised 
enlargement methodology, and the requirements set out in the Negotiating Framework, which 
put an even stronger focus on the fundamentals of the accession process.  
The Albanian authorities’ political commitment to the strategic goal of EU integration and 
their ambition to move forward in the accession negotiations based on continuing progress on 
reforms have been consistently stated as the country’s key priority. This commitment has 
been maintained despite the challenge of addressing the economic and social consequences of 
the triple shock of the 2019 earthquake, the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia’s war of 
aggression against Ukraine. The ongoing accession negotiation process now needs to 
translate into an acceleration of EU-related reforms.  
Albania has maintained its record of full alignment with the EU’s common foreign and 
security policy during the reporting period. As a non-permanent member since January 2022, 
Albania has been actively engaged in the UN Security Council as a co-penholder of 
resolutions condemning Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, aligning with the EU 
position when co-sponsoring and voting on UN resolutions on Russia’s invasion of Ukraine 
and its humanitarian impact, and also when voting on the suspension of Russia from the 
Human Rights Council. Albania’s stance is a strong signal of its strategic choice of EU 
accession and of its role as a reliable partner. 
1.2. 
SUMMARY OF THE REPORT1  
As regards political criteria, regular local elections on 14 May 2023 were conducted in a  
generally calm manner. Observers assessed them as well-administered, competitive and with 
the participation of key political actors. Concerns relate to the misuse of state resources, 
claims of pressure on public sector workers and voters, and allegations of vote buying. A low 
turnout of only 38.2% was registered. The political scene continued to be marked by political 
polarisation, against the background of persistent deep divisions within the largest opposition 
party. Parliamentary oversight of the executive remained limited. In March 2023, 
amendments were adopted with a large majority that strengthen the consultative role of 
Parliament in the accession negotiations process. Delays and politicisation of the 
appointments of the Ombudsperson and of the new Anti-Discrimination Commissioner 
weaken these independent institutions. Under the coordination of the chief negotiator and the 
newly reformed EU negotiation structures, Albanian institutions have mobilised significant 
 
1 This report covers the period from June 2022 to June 2023. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from the government of Albania, the EU Member States, European Parliament reports 
and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also includes the results of 
comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of law. 
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of 
preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made 
during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some 
progress, good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been used. 
 
4 
 
resources to engage actively in the screening process and to prepare for the next steps of the 
accession negotiations. While putting EU-related reforms at the centre of its legislative and 
policy planning, the government needs to refrain from measures that are not in line with EU 
standards. The government also needs to engage in stronger public communication on the EU 
accession process. While civil society is generally free, shortcomings negatively impact the 
ability of civil society organisations to contribute to policy processes. The role of civil 
society, including in the EU accession negotiation process, needs to be strengthened. 
Albania remains moderately prepared in the area of public administration. The new 
strategies on public administration reform and public financial management reform have yet 
to be prepared and adopted. The reorganisation of roles and responsibilities within the Office 
of the Prime Minister is still ongoing. Provisions on merit-based recruitment in the Civil 
Service Law are not consistently applied, especially at senior management level. Significant 
efforts were made on the digitisation of public services, but it remains crucial to ensure 
equitable access to services for citizens with limited digital skills or limited access to IT 
equipment. Increased attention is also required on digital security and protection of personal 
data, especially following the cyberattacks in 2022 and a number of data leaks. 
Albania has a moderate level of preparation on the functioning of the judiciary. The 
implementation of the justice reform continued, resulting in good progress overall. The 
appointments to the Constitutional Court have been completed with all nine judges now in 
office, of whom eight with full nine-year mandate. The Specialised Structure against 
Corruption and Organised Crime (SPAK) achieved further results, and a new Chief Special 
Prosecutor was elected in December 2022 after a sound process. The efficiency of the judicial 
system and access to justice continued to be affected by the long timescale of proceedings, 
increased workload and high backlog of cases, which remains particularly high in appeal and 
first instance courts. Progress was made in addressing judicial vacancies through the 
swearing-in of 40 new magistrates in October 2023. The temporary evaluation of all judges 
and prosecutors (the vetting process) has continued to advance at a satisfactory pace. By 6 
October, 57% of the vetting dossiers processed had resulted in dismissals, resignations or 
termination of mandate. In June 2023, the Special Court of First Instance against Corruption 
and Organised Crime sentenced the former Head of the Constitutional Court to 6 months in 
prison for false declaration and concealment during the vetting process. Albania must ensure 
that criminal procedures are systematically initiated against judges and prosecutors whose 
vetting process revealed criminal elements. The case management system and the judicial 
training system need improvement to further increase efficiency and professionalism across 
the sector. Positive actions have been taken towards increasing the relevance of the 
continuous training programme in the reporting period. Some progress was made on the case 
management system, particularly with the establishment of the interoperability working 
group and the adoption of the interoperability framework setting the basis for the roll-out of 
the system. 
Albania has some level of preparation in the fight against corruption. Despite some 
progress and continued efforts in fighting corruption, it remains an area of serious concern. 
SPAK bodies have conducted investigations in a number of high-level cases, ordering several 
arrests and convictions in a number of high level cases. Overall, corruption is prevalent in 
many areas of public and business life and preventive measures continue to have a limited 
impact, particularly in vulnerable sectors. Increasing the number of final convictions at a 
high-level remains an important priority to further tackle the culture of impunity. Further 
efforts are needed to ensure due judicial follow-up in vetting cases where there are 
indications of criminal offences. The institutional capacity of the Anti-Corruption 
 
5 
 
Directorate-General in the Ministry of Justice needs to be further strengthened and the 
composition of the Ethics Commission needs to be revised. The sectors most vulnerable to 
corruption require targeted risk assessments and dedicated actions. 
Albania has some level of preparation in the fight against organised crime, with a continued 
good level of cooperation with EU Members States and EU agencies. More efforts need to be 
made in the fight against illicit drugs, including through an increase in the capacities of the 
law enforcement authorities. Following the adoption of a law on cannabis production for 
medical and industrial purposes, Albania needs to ensure that mechanisms are in place to 
effectively prevent cannabis from being diverted to unintended use. Progress that has 
achieved with the seizure and confiscation of assets linked to organised crime must continue. 
Efforts also need to continue to ensure an increase in the number of prosecutions and final 
convictions, especially in high-level cases, and to establish the asset recovery office. 
Countering cybercrime, money laundering and preventing and combatting trafficking in 
human beings remain areas in which additional results are needed. All forms of child sexual 
abuse online should be criminalised and prosecuted. Progress was made on the 
implementation of the Moneyval recommendations, and of the Financial Action Task Force 
(FATF) Action Plan. Albania remained on the FATF list of jurisdictions under increased 
monitoring due to its draft Voluntary Tax Compliance (VTC) law (including a criminal 
amnesty). Following the draft law's withdrawal, in June 2023 FATF decided to propose an 
on-site visit, which took place in August and led to Albania's delisting in October 2023. 
Nevertheless, Albania should ensure that any future VTC law (including potential criminal 
amnesties) complies with the EU acquis and international standards. The track record on 
money-laundering and high-level corruption cases remains insufficient, and financial 
investigations need to be further developed.   
On fundamental rights, efforts at implementation of the legal and policy framework need to 
be intensified. Progress was made on the use of alternatives to detention. There was some 
progress on the rights of persons with disabilities, as concerns biopsychosocial assessment. 
The process of first registration of property and other transitional processes need to advance 
in full transparency, including by tackling corruption. On the protection of national 
minorities, the adoption of the remaining implementing legislation did not advance. 
Furthermore, Albania needs to put in place strong legal and institutional safeguards to prevent 
further breaches of personal data. 
Albania is in between some and moderate level of preparation in the area of freedom of 
expression. Limited progress was made. The intersection of business and political interests, 
the lack of transparency of sources of finance, the concentration of media ownership, 
intimidation and precarious working conditions continued to hamper media independence, 
pluralism and the quality of journalism. The atmosphere of verbal and physical attacks, smear 
campaigns and intimidation lawsuits against journalists has not improved. 
The application of gender-responsive budgeting continued to improve. Since January 2022, 
the Albanian government has implemented a range of measures aimed at supporting families, 
women and girls, and vulnerable groups, as a response to the crisis caused by the COVID-19 
pandemic and Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine.  The economic assistance to 
victims of domestic violence has been increased significantly. The implementation of the law 
on gender equality and of the national strategy for gender needs to be further intensified. 
The legal framework on migration is largely aligned with the EU acquis but needs updating 
in line with developments on the EU side. Albania has contributed to the management of the 
mixed migration flows towards the EU by cooperating to implement the EU Action Plan on 
the Western Balkans. It concluded a revised Frontex Status Agreement in September. In 
 
6 
 
2022, there was a 34% reduction in the number of irregular migrants entering Albania 
compared with 2021. No progress was made in referrals and access to asylum procedures and 
shortcomings in the return procedures remain. Albania should take concrete steps to address 
the needs of unaccompanied minors and align its visa policy with that of the EU. Although 
the number of asylum applications lodged by Albanian nationals in EU Member States and 
Schengen-associated countries remains lower than the pre-pandemic level, it increased again 
in 2022. Continuous and sustained efforts are still needed to address this phenomenon.  
On the economic criteria, Albania has between a moderately and good level of preparation on 
developing a functioning market economy and made some progress in addressing last 
year’s recommendations. The economy showed resilience and GDP growth remained strong 
in 2022, despite the economic fallout from Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine. 
Albania is at level of preparation to cope with competitive pressure and market forces 
within the EU and made some progress on structural reforms in the energy market, transport 
infrastructure, the digitalisation of the economy and education outcomes, though significant 
gaps with regional and European levels remain. 
On public procurement, Albania is moderately prepared and has made some progress, in 
particular through an increased use of the most economically advantageous tender award 
criteria. On statistics, Albania is moderately prepared, and made some progress in further 
aligning with standards of the European System of National and Regional Accounts (ESA 
2010) and in steps to strengthen the role of the Institute of Statistics. Albania is moderately 
prepared in the area of financial control where some progress was made, in particular with 
the updates to the legal framework on internal control and internal audit and the 
implementation of the policy document on the strengthening of public internal financial 
control, and continued to target internal audits on arrears. 
Albania is moderately prepared in most areas of the internal market, namely free movement 
of goods, services and capital, financial services, and competition policy. The same applies to 
company law and intellectual property law. Some progress was made on intellectual property 
rights and on free movement of family members of EU citizens as well as on financial 
services. However, no progress was made on competition policy, where the State aid 
Commission still lacks operational independence. Preparations are at an early stage on 
consumer and health protection, where the country made limited progress. Some progress 
was also made on free movement of capital, which led to the country’s removal  from the 
FATF list of jurisdictions under increased monitoring. 
Albania has achieved a moderate level of preparation in many areas linked to 
competitiveness and inclusive growth, namely taxation, enterprise and industrial policy, 
social policy and employment, education and culture and the customs union. The same holds 
true for the digital transformation and media, where the country made good progress, 
including by joining the Digital Europe programme in June 2023. Albania has some level of 
preparation in the fields of science and research. The country reached a moderate to good 
level of preparation in economic and monetary policy, as the governance and monetary policy 
of the Bank of Albania were appropriate and effective in dealing with the crisis caused by 
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine; more efforts are required regarding its 
independence. With limited progress made on the customs union, more efforts are also 
required in pursuing the fight against smuggling, corruption and imports of counterfeit 
products.  
As regards the green agenda and sustainable connectivity. Albania has some level of 
preparation in the areas of transport, trans-European networks, environment and climate 
change, and it has a moderate to good level on energy. Progress is noted on the reform of the 
 
7 
 
day-ahead and intra-day electricity markets, on renewable energy auctions and in developing 
transport and regional energy networks. Further efforts are needed on renewable energy and 
on energy efficiency. Albania ratified its participation in the Union Civil Protection 
Mechanism and is active in it. On the environment and climate, further efforts are needed on 
water and waste management, environmental law enforcement and nature protection. This 
cluster and the reforms concerned have significant links to Albania’s economic reform 
programme, the Commission’s economic and investment plan and the green agenda for the 
Western Balkans. Albania needs to address strategic investment planning, and the 
implementation and monitoring capacity of infrastructure projects. 
Albania has some level of preparation in most areas linked to resources, agriculture and 
regional policy and cohesion, namely agriculture and rural development, veterinary and 
phytosanitary policy, and financial and budgetary provisions. There is a moderate level of 
preparation in fisheries and aquaculture as well as on regional policy. Some progress was 
observed in most areas covered, notably with adoption of the Law on wine and regarding 
administrative capacities for the instrument for pre-accession assistance for rural 
development programme (IPARD III). Further efforts are needed in regional policy 
particularly on administrative capacity and coordination between central, local and municipal 
levels and on financial and budgetary provisions. 
Albania has a good level of preparation as regards external relations, foreign security and 
defence. On external relations, Albania made some progress, further aligning its legislation 
with the EU acquis on preventing trade in certain goods that could be used for capital 
punishment and torture. As regards the EU common foreign and security policy, Albania 
maintained full alignment with all relevant EU decisions and declarations during the 
reporting period. As a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council since January 
2022, Albania continues to be actively engaged in promoting and defending the rules-based 
international order as well as Women, Peace and Security.  
1.3.  
 STATE OF PLAY OF THE ACCESSION NEGOTIATIONS  
Following the Inter-Governmental Conference on accession negotiations with Albania that 
took place on 19 July 2022, the Commission immediately launched the screening process, 
which is progressing smoothly. All sessions on Cluster 1 (Fundamentals), Cluster 2 (Internal 
Market), Cluster 3 (Competitiveness and Inclusive Growth) and Cluster 4 (Green Agenda and 
Sustainable Connectivity) have taken place. Explanatory sessions on Cluster 5 (Resources, 
Agriculture and Cohesion) and Cluster 6 (External Relations) have been completed and 
bilateral sessions on these are ongoing. The remaining screening meetings are scheduled until 
November 2023. 
 
2. CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
2.1. FUNCTIONING OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION REFORM  
2.1.1 Democracy 
The reporting period was marked by the start of the EU accession negotiations process, 
including the beginning of the screening. The political scene continued to be marked by 
political polarisation, against the background of persistent deep divisions within the largest 
opposition party. This has continued to negatively affect the Parliament’s key functions of 
holding the executive accountable through effective scrutiny and of serving as a forum for 
constructive political debate, as well as its responsibility to elect in a timely manner the heads 
of key independent institutions such as the Ombudsperson.