3 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION  
1.1. 
CONTEXT  
Following its application for EU membership in February 2016, Bosnia and Herzegovina has 
to fulfil the 14 key priorities from the May 2019 Commission Opinion,1 which covers the 
areas of democracy/functionality, the rule of law, fundamental rights, and public 
administration reform. This is required for the Commission to recommend the opening of EU 
accession negotiations with Bosnia and Herzegovina. On the basis of the December 2019 
conclusions of the EU Council, the Commission focuses its annual reports on Bosnia and 
Herzegovina on the implementation of the Opinion’s key priorities.2  
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to implement the Stabilisation and Association Agreement 
(SAA) and the joint bodies established under the agreement meet regularly. The SAA and its 
Interim Agreement, applied since 2008, have allowed progressive trade liberalisation and 
mutual duty-free access for most goods. In 2020, the EU remained Bosnia and Herzegovina’s 
main trading partner, accounting for 65% of the country’s total trade in goods, although with 
a 10.2% decrease due to the pandemic. In 2020, total trade was worth EUR 9.6 billion, while 
the country’s trade deficit with the EU amounted to EUR 1.5 billion.  
The public political commitment of the authorities at all levels of government to the strategic 
goal of European integration has not been turned into concrete action, as political leaders 
continued to engage in divisive rhetoric and unconstructive political disputes, which have 
hindered progress on the 14 key priorities so far. Still, some significant steps have been taken, 
amid the pandemic, to address the key priorities from the Opinion. In particular, municipal 
elections were held in Mostar in December 2020, for the first time since 2008, fulfilling part 
of key priority 1. The Stabilisation and Association Parliamentary Committee was held in 
June 2021, after a five-year stalemate, marking good progress on key priority 3. An inter-
agency working group was established in May 2021, to discuss constitutional and electoral 
reforms required to address key priorities 1 and 4.  All levels of government also adopted the 
action plan on public administration reform and strategies on public financial management, 
contributing to key priority 14. Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to move forward on all other 
key priorities.  
The COVID-19 pandemic continued throughout the reporting period. By end September 
2021, the country had recorded 227,579 cases and 10,606  deaths related to the pandemic. The 
Commission redirected EUR 80.5 million in grants for immediate needs and the socio-
economic response to the pandemic. The Commission also secured macro-financial assistance 
of EUR 250 million in very favourable loans, which was ratified by Bosnia and Herzegovina 
in June 2021. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina does not have a countrywide vaccine strategy, and the entities have 
proceeded with their own separate vaccine procurement. Together with the donation of 
medical equipment, the continued delivery of EU-funded vaccines is a sign of concrete EU 
solidarity. Bosnia and Herzegovina received 214,110 Pfizer/BioNTech doses from the EU 
between May and August 2021, facilitated by Austria and funded by the EU4Health grant. 
COVAX also delivered over 332,640 doses to Bosnia and Herzegovina by end August 2021. 
Overall, the EU and its Member States provided over 1.3 million vaccine doses by September 
2021. By end September 2021, around 13% of the population had been fully vaccinated.  
 
                                                          
1 SWD(2019) 222 final, COM(2019) 261 final 
2https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2019/12/10/council-conclusions-on-commission-
opinion-on-bosnia-and-herzegovina-s-application-for-membership-of-the-european-union/ 
 
4 
 
1.2. 
SUMMARY OF THE REPORT3 4 
Regarding the political criteria, legislative and executive authorities had a low output due to 
political polarisation and the disruption caused by pandemic. The Federation entity 
government is still acting in a caretaker role.  Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Constitution remains 
in breach of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), following the Sejdić-Finci 
and related cases. An inter-agency working group is expected to discuss electoral and 
constitutional reforms, was established in May 2021. Municipal elections were held in Mostar 
in December 2020, for the first time since 2008. The Stabilisation and Association 
Parliamentary Committee met and adopted its rules of procedures in June 2021, following a 
five-year stalemate. Inclusive process of electoral reform, through genuine dialogue and in 
line with European standards that would eliminate all forms of inequality and discrimination 
in the electoral process, is paramount. No progress was made in improving the electoral 
framework in line with European standards and ensuring transparency of political party 
financing. Bosnia and Herzegovina has yet to address the recommendations by the Office for 
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation 
in Europe (OSCE/ODIHR), the Venice Commission and the Council of Europe’s Group of 
States against Corruption (GRECO). A number of Constitutional Court decisions have yet to 
be fully enforced. The development of a national programme for the adoption of the EU 
acquis is still pending. Limited progress was made in ensuring an enabling environment for 
civil society.  
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation with public administration 
reform (PAR); some progress was made by adopting the action plan on public administration 
reform as well as strategies on public financial management at all levels of government. The 
country needs to ensure a professional and depoliticised civil service and a coordinated 
countrywide approach to policy-making.  
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage/has some level of preparation as regards its 
judiciary. No progress was made in this area over the reporting period. The authorities have 
taken limited action to address the findings of the Expert Report on Rule of Law issues 
(‘Priebe report’). Integrity amendments are due to enter in parliamentary procedure; their 
adoption is key to establish a credible and rigorous system of verification of financial 
statements of judicial office holders. Persistent and evident signs of deterioration continue to 
require urgent measures to strengthen the integrity of and regain citizens’ trust in the 
judiciary. Lack of commitment to judicial reform from political actors, and the poor 
functioning of the judicial system continued to undermine the citizens’ enjoyment of rights 
and the fight against corruption and organised crime. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage/has some level of preparation in the prevention 
and fight against corruption and organised crime. No progress was made in this area over 
the reporting period; urgent action is required to adopt the pending legislation on public 
                                                          
3 This report covers the period from June 2020 to June 2021. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from the government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the EU Member States, European 
Parliament reports and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. This also 
includes the results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the 
area of rule of law. 
4 For the state of play the report uses the following assessment scales: early stage, some level of preparation, 
moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. For progress made during the reporting 
period, the following scale has been used: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, good 
progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, also interim steps have been used. 
 
 
5 
 
procurement and conflict of interest. During the pandemic, the negative effects of widespread 
corruption and signs of political capture continued to manifest strongly during the pandemic, 
directly affecting the wellbeing of citizens. The selective and non-transparent prosecution and 
judicial follow-up of corruption cases is a cause of concern. There are systemic shortcomings 
in the operational cooperation among law enforcement agencies and a very limited exchange 
of intelligence. The police are vulnerable to political interference. Financial investigations and 
asset seizures are largely ineffective. Although some preparatory steps were taken, the contact 
point for cooperation with Europol is not yet operational. Bosnia and Herzegovina has not 
taken any steps to establish cooperation with Eurojust. The country needs to continue its 
efforts in the fight against terrorism and drug trafficking and increase its capacity to do so.  
As regards fundamental rights, while the legislative and institutional framework is largely in 
place, Bosnia and Herzegovina has yet to adopt a comprehensive strategic framework. 
Significant reforms are needed to ensure that all citizens are able to exercise their political 
rights and to ensure non-discriminatory, inclusive and quality education for all, including by 
overcoming the practice of ‘two schools under one roof’. No progress was made on 
guaranteeing freedom of expression and of the media, on protecting journalists against threats 
and violence by ensuring an appropriate judicial follow-up, nor on ensuring the financial 
sustainability of the public broadcasting system. Challenges persist as regards the freedom of 
assembly, particularly in the Republika Srpska entity, where activists have been subjected to 
intimidation and judicial prosecution. 
The failure of the authorities to establish a sustainable migration and asylum system led to a 
humanitarian crisis in December 2020. Following extensive EU engagement and support, a 
temporary tent camp was established in Lipa to provide shelter to all persons in need. A 
permanent multi-purpose reception centre is being built  in Lipa in the course of 2021. Bosnia 
and Herzegovina has stepped up efforts to improve migration management; it needs to ensure 
effective coordination, at all levels, of border management and migration management 
capacity, as well as the functioning of the asylum system. This requires a fair distribution of 
responsibilities among all entities and cantons, including in the hosting of reception centres.  
As regards the economic criteria, Bosnia and Herzegovina has made limited progress and is 
at an early stage of establishing a functioning market economy. The country took measures to 
counter the negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and the labour 
market. The Central Bank undertook significant measures to improve its analytical capacities. 
Some steps were taken to strengthen the financial sector’s shock resilience. However, there 
have been no significant measures to improve the functioning of the product markets. 
Cooperation and coordination among the country’s stakeholders has further deteriorated. 
Resistance from the Republika Srpska entity against EU acquis-related country-wide reforms 
has further slowed down the country’s compliance with the EU accession criteria. As a result, 
the country’s institutional set-up as well as its internal market remains fragmented. No 
improvement has been reached with respect to the rule of law and the functioning of country-
wide supervisory and regulatory institutions. This continues to impede the country’s business 
environment. The quality of public spending has not improved, while the public sector has 
remained inefficient and oversized.  
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made limited progress, and remains at an early stage in terms of 
capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces in the EU. The overall quality 
level of education has remained low, while measures to improve the transport and energy 
infrastructure have remained insufficient. The extent of structural adjustment has been 
limited. 
 
6 
 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is overall at an early stage/has some level of preparation regarding 
its level of preparedness and ability to take on the obligations of EU membership and needs 
to significantly step up the alignment with the EU acquis and implement and enforce the 
relevant legislation. Limited to no progress was made on the different EU acquis chapters 
during the reporting period.  
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been backsliding in the area of public procurement, where it 
applied preferential treatment for domestic bidders in awarding public contracts during most 
of the reporting period; amendments to the public procurement law are awaiting 
parliamentary adoption. Limited progress was made on statistics, as preparation for the next 
population and housing census has hardly progressed. Some progress was made on public 
internal financial control, with both entities adopting strategies. 
Major steps are required to align the legislative framework with the EU acquis on the 
internal market (free movement of goods, services and capital, competition policy, and 
financial services). Bosnia and Herzegovina made some progress only on competition policy, 
further aligning the law on State aid with the EU acquis, and in financial services.  This 
cluster is key for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s preparations for the requirements of the EU’s 
internal market and is highly relevant for early integration and the development of the 
Common Regional Market. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina made limited or no progress in most areas of competitiveness and 
inclusive growth (information society and media, taxation, economic and monetary policy, 
enterprise and industrial policy, education and culture, and the customs union), where it is at 
an early stage or has some level of preparation. These areas have significant links to the 
country’s Economic Reform Programme. Socio-economic reforms must be pursued to help 
address the existing structural weaknesses, low competitiveness, high unemployment, as well 
as the impact of the pandemic, which has further increased their urgency. Some progress was 
made with the adoption of policies on inclusive education, vocational education and training, 
and entrepreneurial learning.  
Bosnia and Herzegovina made some or limited progress in most areas related to the Green 
Agenda and sustainable connectivity, (trans-European networks, energy, and environment 
and climate change), where it is at an early stage or has some level of preparation. The 
country needs to significantly step up its ambitions towards a green transition, and align its 
laws on gas and electricity with the EU acquis. The green transition and sustainable 
connectivity are key to economic integration within the region and with the EU, facilitating 
cross-border trade within the region and creating real benefits for businesses and citizens. 
This cluster and the reforms concerned have significant links to the Economic Reform 
Programme, the Economic and Investment Plan and the Green Agenda for the Western 
Balkans.  
Bosnia and Herzegovina made no progress in the areas linked to resources, agriculture and 
cohesion (agriculture and rural development, food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy, 
fisheries, and financial and budgetary provisions), where preparation is mostly at an early 
stage.  
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation but made no progress as regards 
external relations. The country needs to intensify the efforts to finalise its accession to the 
World Trade Organization. Bosnia and Herzegovina is strongly encouraged to improve its 
alignment with the EU foreign policy statements and restrictive measures, which has 
significantly declined to reach 43% by August 2021, which is worrying. Bosnia and 
Herzegovina continued to actively participate in regional cooperation and maintain good 
neighbourly relations.  
 
7 
 
 
2. 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS  
2.1. 
FUNCTIONING OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC 
ADMINISTRATION REFORM  
2.1.1  Democracy  
The political environment remained polarised in the reporting period, with repeated calls from 
the Republika Srpska entity leadership to roll back reforms and to block State-level 
institutions, the latest in July 2021 after the High Representative used its executive powers to 
criminalise denial of genocide and war crimes. The Federation entity remains with a caretaker 
government, three years after the October 2018 elections. Polarisation between the different 
levels of government also hampered the response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including in 
terms of procurement of vaccines. Bosnia and Herzegovina has taken some significant step on 
the 14 key priorities, but most substantive issues remain outstanding. Municipal elections 
were held in Mostar in December 2020, for the first time since 2008. An action plan on the 
key priorities remains pending with the Council of Ministers due to political disagreements on 
the distribution of competences. The State budget for 2021 is still awaiting adoption; State 
institutions are funded via three-monthly temporary financing decisions.  
Elections  
Some progress was made towards addressing part of the Opinion key priority 1 as municipal 
elections were held in Mostar on 20 December 2020, for the first time since 2008, in the 
context of the local elections which were held orderly in November across the country. 
Previous recommendations by OSCE/ODIHR, Venice Commission and GRECO remain 
unaddressed, including as regards transparency of political party financing. An inter-agency 
working group was established in May 2021 to discuss electoral and constitutional reforms. 
Political actors and institutions need to engage in a transparent and inclusive dialogue to 
address long-standing electoral shortcomings ahead of the next general elections in October 
2022.  
No legislative steps were taken to implement the comprehensive set of recommendations 
issued by OSCE/ODIHR and GRECO on the transparency and integrity of the electoral 
process and the implementation of election results. Bosnia and Herzegovina does not have an 
action plan for this.  
Ethnic- and residence-based restrictions to the right to stand for election to the Presidency and 
the House of Peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina remain in violation of the ECHR and its 
Protocols. In December 2020, in the Pudarić case, the European Court of Human Rights 
(ECtHR) found that the applicant, a Serb residing in the Federation entity, was discriminated 
for his inability to stand as a candidate for the Presidency. This is the fifth decision since 2009 
in the Sejdić-Finci case law. 
In May 2021, an inter-agency working group (IAWG) was established to discuss 
constitutional and electoral reforms to address key priorities 1 and 4 ahead of the October 
2022 general elections. The working group, composed of members of parliament and of 
government of both ruling and opposition parties, is expected to prepare legislative 
amendments to bring the electoral framework in compliance with the case law of the ECtHR 
and with European standards. The IAWG has the mandate to consult expert from civil society, 
the Central Electoral Commission, and academic community.  
Municipal elections were held orderly on 15 November 2020 across the country amid the 
pandemic and were marked by organisational difficulties and divisive campaigning. Voting