3 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION   
1.1. 
CONTEXT 
Following its application for EU membership in February 2016, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
must fulfil 14 key priorities as set out in the Commission's Opinion1 of May 2019 covering 
democracy/functionality, the rule of law, fundamental rights, and public administration 
reform. Once the Commission assesses that Bosnia and Herzegovina has achieved the 
necessary degree of compliance with the membership criteria and in particular has met the 
key priorities, the Commission will recommend opening EU accession negotiations. On the 
basis of the December 2019 conclusions of the Council of the European Union2, the 
Commission focuses its annual reports on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s implementation of the 
14 key priorities.  
On the basis of a recommendation by the Commission3, in December 2022 the European 
Council granted Bosnia and Herzegovina the status of candidate country4. The positive 
momentum that followed the granting of candidate status resulted in limited progress on the 
Opinion’s key priorities. Positive developments at state level were in stark contrast to 
negative developments at the level of the Republika Srpska entity, impacting the country as a 
whole.    
Following the October 2022 elections, state and entity-level legislative and executive bodies 
were set up by May 2023. The Commissioner and the Chairwoman of the Council of 
Ministers co-chaired a High-Level Political Forum in Sarajevo on 17 May to monitor the 
implementation of the steps in the recommendation, report on further progress on the ground 
and discuss reform efforts along the EU path. At the Political Forum the authorities 
reconfirmed their commitment to the strategic goal of EU accession.  
Following the granting of candidate status, the public commitment of political parties to the 
strategic goal of European integration brought positive results. Important steps and 
commitments were made towards the fulfilment of the key priorities, despite negative 
legislative developments at entity level. The formation of a state-level coalition government 
at record speed is an important proof of a new political dynamism and will.  
To address the steps specified in the Commission recommendation for candidate status, in the 
reporting period Bosnia and Herzegovina took the following actions. The Council of 
Ministers adopted strategies to counter organised crime, made an updated risk assessment and 
an accompanying action plan on anti-money laundering and combating the financing of 
terrorism, adopted strategies and action plans on migration and on terrorism, and appointed a 
supervisory body for the implementation of the national war crimes processing strategy. The 
contact point with Europol finally started operations in June 2023. The Council of Ministers 
endorsed a set of draft laws, notably on: integrity in the judiciary; torture prevention 
(designating the Ombudsman as national preventive mechanism); foreigners; and freedom of 
access to information. These were adopted by Parliament in August and September 2023.    
The Council of Ministers also endorsed the legal basis for conducting negotiations on the 
southern and eastern gas interconnections, and the cooperation agreement with Eurojust. The 
Council of Ministers also endorsed the organisation of the Digital Summit of the Western 
 
1 SWD(2019) 222 final, COM(2019) 261 final. 
2https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2019/12/10/council-conclusions-on-commission-
opinion-on-bosnia-and-herzegovina-s-application-for-membership-of-the-european-union/ 
3 COM(2022) 528 final, p. 38-39. 
4 https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/60872/2022-12-15-euco-conclusions-en.pdf 
 
4 
 
Balkans, held in Sarajevo in October 2023, the establishment of the Computer Emergency 
Response Team (CERT), and the procurement of helicopters for the Ministry of Defence and 
the Armed Forces. A state budget for 2023 was adopted in March. Bosnia and Herzegovina 
has launched ratification of two regional mobility agreements and needs to do the same for 
the agreement on free travel with identity card.  
Recent developments, mainly in the Republika Srpska entity, are going against the positive 
momentum. Notably, the entity called for constitutional judges to resign and adopted a law 
decreeing that Constitutional Court decisions would not be implemented, calling into 
question the authority, integrity and the unimpeded functioning of the Constitutional Court 
and breaching the constitutional and legal order of the country. The entity also reintroduced 
criminal penalties for defamation, which severely impact the environment for civil society 
and restrict freedom of expression and media freedom, representing a major step backwards 
in the protection of fundamental rights. A draft law targeting civil society groups as ‘foreign 
agents’ was adopted in the first reading by the entity assembly. If finally adopted, this law 
would further undermine the effective functioning of democracy and would mark another 
regrettable and undeniable major step backwards. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to implement the Stabilisation and Association 
Agreement (SAA) which, together with its Interim Agreement applied since 2008, has 
enabled progressive trade liberalisation with the EU and mutual duty-free access for most 
goods. Continued protectionist measures are, however, a cause of increasing and serious 
concern regarding implementation of the SAA. 
Policy dialogue under the SAA was restored after political blockage in 2021 and early 2022. 
The cycle of sectoral subcommittees opened in 2020 was completed in June 2023. A 
Stabilisation and Association Council took place in July 2023.  
Bosnia and Herzegovina received the first 90% of the EUR 70 million energy support 
package in May 2023. The Council of Ministers needs to urgently appoint a National IPA 
Coordinator (NIPAC) for IPA III. 
1.2. 
SUMMARY OF THE REPORT5  
As regards political criteria, elections took place in October 2022. The High Representative 
intervened multiple times in electoral matters, including on the evening of the election day, 
which according to OSCE/ODIHR challenged legal certainty.  
All state and entity-level legislative and executive bodies were set up by May 2023. A new 
state-level Council of Ministers took office in late January, supported by a ruling coalition 
including SNSD, HDZ BiH, and the ‘trojka’ (SDP, NiP, Naša Stranka). A state budget for 
2023 was adopted in March. The new Council of Ministers took significant steps to adopt EU 
reforms following the granting of candidate status: it adopted the strategy on organised crime, 
an updated risk assessment and accompanying action plan on anti-money laundering and 
combating terrorism financing, as well as the strategies and action plans on migration and on 
terrorism. It also appointed a supervisory body for implementation of the national war crimes 
 
5 This report covers the period from June 2022 to June 2023. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from Bosnia and Herzegovina, the EU Member States, European Parliament reports and 
information from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also includes the results of 
comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of law.  
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of 
preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made 
during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some 
progress, good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been used. 
 
5 
 
processing strategy. The contact point with Europol finally started operations in June 2023. 
The Council of Ministers also endorsed a set of draft laws, notably on: integrity in the 
judiciary; torture prevention (designating the Ombudsman as national preventive 
mechanism); foreigners; and freedom of access to information. These were adopted by 
Parliament in August and September 2023.    
A number of Constitutional Court decisions have yet to be fully enforced, including on state 
property. The Constitutional Court suspended or quashed several legal and political acts by 
the Republika Srpska entity. The entity leadership determined to enforce such laws 
nevertheless, endangering legal certainty. The entity assembly called on state-level 
constitutional judges to resign, and in June 2023 it legalised the non-publication of decisions 
of the High Representative and the non-implementation of the rulings of the Constitutional 
Court, calling into question the authority and integrity of the Constitutional Court and 
breaching the constitutional and legal order of the country. Both entities’ assemblies should 
appoint judges swiftly to the vacant judges’ seats and ensure the full composition of the 
Constitutional Court. 
Constitutional and electoral reforms are still needed to bring the Constitution into line with 
the European Convention on Human Rights, complying with the Sejdić-Finci case law.  
No steps were taken to develop socio-economic reforms in line with Commission 
recommendations and with the joint conclusions of the economic and financial dialogue. The 
continued protectionist measures are a matter of concern in the implementation of the SAA. 
Policy dialogue under the SAA was restored after its political blockage in 2021-2022. Bosnia 
and Herzegovina has not yet developed a national plan for the adoption of the EU acquis 
(NPAA), as required by the SAA. 
Some progress was made on the alignment with the common foreign and security policy 
(CFSP). Bosnia and Herzegovina significantly improved its alignment with EU foreign 
policy. Republika Srpska entity authorities and parties advocated for a neutral stance on 
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, contesting the country’s alignment with EU statements 
and obstructing the full implementation of restrictive measures against Russia. Bosnia and 
Herzegovina has launched ratification of two regional mobility agreements and needs to do 
the same for the agreement on free travel with identity cards. Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an 
early stage of preparation and made some progress on public administration reform (PAR). 
Some positive steps were taken by (i) adopting the PAR coordination arrangement (‘common 
platform’), including a political decision-making body; (ii) implementing comprehensive and 
countrywide public finance management, (iii) improving capacity for public consultation at 
state level and on regulatory impact assessment in the Republika Srpska entity, (iv) adopting 
a strategy on human resource management in the Federation entity, (v) improving the 
professional development and performance appraisal in the Federation entity and at state 
level, and  (vi) adopting a Law on freedom of access to information, aimed at fostering pro-
active disclosure and transparency. Some five years after adoption, the PAR action plan has 
been implemented only to a limited extent. Civil service laws are still not harmonised with 
each other and merit principles are not enshrined in recruitment procedures. The monitoring 
of human resources is not effective in detecting irregularities. A political decision-making 
body, included in the ‘common platform’, still needs to become operational to steer reforms 
effectively. The capacity of entity-level PAR coordinators remains weak. Bosnia and 
Herzegovina needs to complete essential steps to improve the overall functioning of the 
public administration by ensuring a professional and depoliticised civil service and a 
coordinated, countrywide approach to policymaking.  
 
6 
 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation as regards its judiciary. Some  
progress was made in this area. In September 2023, Bosnia and Herzegovina amended the 
Law on the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council (HJPC) with the aim of establishing a 
system to verify the asset declarations of judges, prosecutors and HJPC members, albeit with 
changes compared to the version on which the Venice Commission was consulted. Such 
changes hamper the effectiveness of the asset-declaration system and therefore need to be 
amended. The Council of Ministers also appointed a new supervisory body overseeing the 
implementation of the national war crimes strategy. The independence and impartiality of the 
judiciary did not improve. Executive and legislative authorities failed to adopt additional 
safeguards. Inconsistency and overly broad discretion persist in applying the rules on 
appointment, disciplinary responsibility, career advancement and conflict of interest of judges 
and prosecutors. Persistent and evident signs of deterioration continue to require urgent 
measures to strengthen integrity and regain the public’s trust in the judiciary. The poor 
functioning of the judicial system continued to undermine citizens’ enjoyment of rights and 
the fight against corruption and organised crime. The Republika Srspka entity assembly 
called on state-level constitutional judges to resign and legalised the the non-implementation 
of the rulings of the Constitutional Court, calling into question the authority and integrity of 
the Constitutional Court and breaching the constitutional and legal order of the country. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is between an early stage and  some level of preparation in the 
prevention of and fight against corruption and organised crime. No progress was made in 
the fight against corruption. Some progress was made in the fight against organised crime.  
The Council of Ministers adopted a strategy on organised crime, a strategy and action plan on 
terrorism, an updated risk assessment and an accompanying action plan on anti-money 
laundering and combating the financing of terrorism. The contact point for cooperation with 
Europol started operating in June 2023. The Ministry of Justice is yet to submit a draft state-
level law on the prevention of conflict of interest in line with European standards to the 
Council of Ministers for adoption. Although there were some indictments pertaining to high-
level corruption, the overall track record on preventing and repressing corruption (including 
at high level) remains insignificant due to operational inefficiency and political interference. 
There are systemic shortcomings in the operational cooperation between law enforcement 
agencies fighting organised crime, due to non-harmonised criminal legislation, weak 
institutional coordination, and a very limited exchange of intelligence. Criminal organisations 
take advantage of legal and administrative loopholes. The police is vulnerable to political 
interference. Financial investigations and asset seizures are also largely ineffective. A 
proactive approach remains fundamental to countering criminal infiltration in the political, 
legal and economic systems. Cooperation with Eurojust and the European Public Prosecutor’s 
Office (EPPO) still needs to be stepped up. Building upon some operational successes in 
2023, Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to continue its efforts in the fight against terrorism and 
drug trafficking and must increase its capacity to do so. A new law on anti-money laundering 
and terrorism financing in line with the EU acquis urgently needs to be adopted.  
The legislative and institutional framework on fundamental rights is largely in place. In 
August 2023 the Parliament adopted a Law on freedom of access to information and amended 
the Law on the human rights Ombudsman to designate it as the national preventive 
mechanism against torture and ill-treatment. Significant reforms are still needed to ensure 
that all citizens can exercise their voting rights and to ensure non-discriminatory, inclusive 
and quality education for all, including by overcoming the practice of ‘two schools under one 
roof’. Pride marches have been held regularly since 2020, and an action plan on the rights of 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and queer (LGBTIQ) persons was adopted in 
July 2022. The  gender action plan was adopted in October 2023. Gender-based violence, ill-
 
7 
 
treatment of detainees and inadequate protection of minorities, including the Roma6, continue 
to cause concern.  
There was backsliding in guaranteeing freedom of expression and freedom of the media by 
protecting journalists from threats and violence and ensuring the financial sustainability of 
the public broadcasting system. Criminal penalties for defamation, reintroduced in the 
Republika Srpska entity in July 2023, severely impact the environment for civil society and 
restrict freedom of expression and of the media. In September 2023, a draft law targeting 
civil society groups as ‘foreign agents’ was also adopted in first reading in the Republika 
Srpska entity assembly; if fully adopted, it would mark another regrettable and undeniable 
major step backwards.  
Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to take steps to improve migration management. Bosnia 
and Herzegovina adopted a new strategy and action plan on migration and asylum and now 
needs to implement them. A Law on foreigners was adopted in September 2023. Major 
weaknesses still undermine the provision of necessary assistance. Bosnia and Herzegovina 
needs to urgently step up efforts to ensure access to asylum and strengthen border 
management. Bosnia and Herzegovina is satisfactorily implementing the integrated border 
management strategy and should adopt in good time the strategy and action plan for 2024-
2029.  
As regards economic criteria, Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of establishing a 
functioning market economy. Cooperation and coordination of economic policymaking at 
state level and among the entities have further deteriorated. As a result, the country’s internal 
market remains fragmented, adversely affecting the business environment.  Unemployment 
remains very high and labour out-migration persists. The country’s economic reform 
programme (ERP) continues to be of poor quality and implementation of reforms is limited. 
The ERP does not contain sufficient credible countrywide measures to address the major 
structural economic challenges in relation to the business environment, the informal 
economy, public enterprises, the green and digital transitions and unemployment. Overall, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s economic performance remains below its potential, as 
policymaking is hindered by political stalemate, an overly short-term approach, and lack of 
focus on policy measures to build growth.  
Bosnia and Herzegovina is between an early stage and some level of preparation in terms of 
capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces in the EU, and made 
limited progress in this area. The quality of education has remained low and the country 
continues to lag behind in the energy and digital transition. In response to changes in global 
demand, some structural adjustment took place, with the focus of value-added moving 
towards services, such as trade, IT and tourism. Economic integration with the EU remains 
high, but overall trade is below potential. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is in between an early stage and some level of preparation in its 
ability to take on the obligations of EU membership. It needs to significantly step up 
alignment with the EU acquis and implement and enforce the necessary legislation. Limited 
to no progress was made on  most EU acquis chapters during the reporting period.  
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation and made limited progress in the area 
of public procurement with the adoption of certain bylaws. The legislation needs to be 
further aligned with the EU acquis, including in the area of concessions. There was limited 
progress on statistics; preparations for the next census have hardly progressed and the 
 
6 In line with the terminology of European institutions the umbrella term ‘Roma’ is used here to refer to a 
number of different groups, without denying the specificities of these groups. 
 
8 
 
production of macroeconomic statistics continues to deviate from the EU acquis. Some 
progress was made on public internal financial control (PIFC) in terms of implementing 
PIFC strategies in the entities and at state level. 
Major steps are needed to align the legal framework across the country with the EU acquis on 
the internal market (free movement of goods, workers, services and capital, company law, 
intellectual property, competition policy, financial services, consumer and health protection) 
as well as to establish an internal market within the country. Bosnia and Herzegovina made 
no progress in this cluster. Procedures and legislation that differ between the entities create 
obstacles to competitiveness and growth and hinder enforcement. Bosnia and Herzegovina 
should improve coordination among the relevant authorities in all areas to achieve a 
countrywide approach and improve their enforcement record. It should abolish ethnic-based 
voting procedures in the Competition Council and State Aid Council and set up a financial 
stability fund as part of the bank resolution framework. This cluster is key for Bosnia and 
Herzegovina’s preparations to meet the EU single market requirements and is very important 
for early integration with and the development of the Common Regional Market, as well as 
for the country to benefit from the Economic and Investment Plan and the New Growth Plan 
for the Western Balkans. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina made limited or no progress in the areas of competitiveness and 
inclusive growth (taxation, digital transformation and media, social policy and employment, 
enterprise and industrial policy, science and research, education and culture and customs). It 
showed no progress in other areas (economic and monetary policy) where it is at an early 
stage or has some level of preparation. These areas have significant links to the economic 
reform programme. The country needs to introduce socio-economic reforms to address 
structural weaknesses, including low competitiveness and high unemployment. Bosnia and 
Herzegovina made some or limited progress in the green agenda and sustainable 
connectivity cluster, where it is at an early stage on energy, environment and climate change. 
It has some level of preparation in the areas of transport and trans-European networks. 
Further steps are needed on connectivity reform measures and in aligning with the Trans-
European Transport Network (TEN-T) and Trans-European Networks for Energy (TEN-E) 
Regulations. The green transition and sustainable connectivity are key to economic 
integration within the region and with the EU. The implementation of the Economic and 
Investment Plan7 and the Green Agenda for the Western Balkans8 needs to be accelerated.  
Bosnia and Herzegovina made no progress in the areas of resources, agriculture and 
cohesion (agriculture and rural development, food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary 
policy, fisheries and acquaculture, and financial and budgetary provisions), where preparation 
is mostly at an early stage. It must step up its efforts to prepare and adopt a post-2021 
countrywide strategy for rural development, align its legislation on food safety, veterinary 
and phytosanitary policy and strengthen its administrative capacity. The administrative 
capacity of laboratories and central databases has yet to be strengthened. More efforts are 
also needed to prepare and adopt a countrywide strategy on fisheries and aquaculture and 
harmonise data collection. Bosnia and Herzegovina should start preparing a countrywide 
regional development strategy. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation in the cluster on external relations. 
Its alignment with the EU Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) significantly 
improved, notably on High Representative statements on behalf of the EU and Council 
 
7 COM(2020) 641 final. 
8 SWD(2020) 223 final. 
 
9 
 
decisions on restrictive measures following Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, 
although the implementation of sanctions remains a challenge. Bosnia and Herzegovina again 
unilaterally introduced and continued export restrictions breaching the terms of the SAA, a 
matter of concern for trade and commercial policy. The country needs to implement the 
additional protocols to the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) on trade 
facilitation and trade and services, and swiftly adopt the additional protocol on dispute 
settlement. Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to actively participate in regional 
cooperation and to maintain good neighbourly relations. It needs to swiftly ratify the three 
regional mobility agreements.  
In 2022, Bosnia and Herzegovina benefited from EUR 45.5 million under the Instrument for 
Pre-accession Assistance 2021-2027 (IPA III)9, providing support for programmes in 
justice, public administration reform, public finance management, EU integration, 
environment and climate change, employment and social protection. This set of programmes, 
complemented by a package of multi-country programmes, significantly contributes to the 
implementation of the Economic and Investment Plan for the Western Balkans and the 
Green Agenda.  
The 2023 annual action plan consists of the energy support package for the Western 
Balkans and provides EUR 70 million to reduce the socio-economic impact of rising energy 
prices, in particular on small and medium-sized enterprises and households, and to support 
the transition to renewable energy sources, in line with the priorities of the EU’s Economic 
and Investment Plan for the Western Balkans.10  
Adopting countrywide sector strategies remains a key requirement for Bosnia and 
Herzegovina to benefit fully from IPA funding in the future. The Council of Ministers 
urgently needs to appoint the National IPA Coordinator (NIPAC) for IPA III.   
 
1.3 ASSESSMENT OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 14 KEY PRIORITIES FOR OPENING EU 
ACCESSION 
NEGOTIATIONS 
AND 
OF 
THE 
STEPS 
SPECIFIED 
IN 
THE COMMISSION 
RECOMMENDATION FOR CANDIDATE STATUS 
Key priority 1: Ensure that elections are conducted in line with European standards by 
implementing OSCE/ODIHR and relevant Venice Commission recommendations, ensuring 
transparency of political party financing, and holding municipal elections in Mostar. 
The electoral frameworks remains to be aligned with European standards and 
recommendations. The High Representative imposed several changes to the electoral 
framework, including on the evening of the election day (2 October 2022), which according 
to OSCE/ODIHR challenged legal certainty. Municipal elections were held in Mostar in 
December 2020.  
Key priority 2: Ensure a track record in the functioning at all levels of the coordination 
mechanism on EU matters including by developing and adopting a national programme for 
the adoption of the EU acquis. 
Step: ensure a track record in the functioning at all levels of the coordination mechanism on 
EU matters including by developing and adopting a national programme for the adoption of 
the EU acquis. 
 
9 C(2022) 9167 final. 
10 C(2022) 9158 final.