3 
 
INTRODUCTION1   
1.1. 
CONTEXT  
Bosnia and Herzegovina applied for EU membership in February 2016. The Commission 
adopted an Opinion2 on its membership application in May 2019, setting out 14 key priorities on 
democracy/functionality, rule of law, fundamental rights and public administration reform. In 
December 2022, the European Council granted Bosnia and Herzegovina candidate country 
status3 on the understanding that eight steps specified in the Commission’s recommendations4 
are taken. In line with the Commission’s recommendation5, in December 2023 the European 
Council decided that it will open accession negotiations with Bosnia and Herzegovina once the 
necessary degree of compliance with the membership criteria is achieved.  
The commitment of the political leadership to the strategic goal of European integration 
brought tangible results between November 2023 and March 2024 in particular with the 
adoption of legislation on integrity in the judiciary, anti-money laundering, and conflict of 
interest. Following the Commission’s recommendation in its report of 12 March 2024 on 
progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina6, the European Council decided on 21 March 2024 to open 
accession negotiations with Bosnia and Herzegovina. The European Council invited the 
Commission to prepare the negotiating framework with a view to its adoption by the Council the 
moment all relevant steps set out in the Commission’s recommendation of October 2022 have 
been taken7. 
The reform dynamic stalled between April and October 2024, among political controversies and 
the political campaign for the October local election. Bosnia and Herzegovina has to continue 
taking resolute action to finalise reforms in line with the EU acquis and European standards, 
addressing all relevant steps. 
Preparations have continued in view of accession negotiations. The Commission held a first 
introductory meeting on 24 April 2024 in Brussels to explain the screening process, which is the 
first stage of accession negotiations. Bosnia and Herzegovina has received the explanatory 
materials on the EU acquis.  
Bosnia and Herzegovina has actively engaged in implementing the new Growth Plan for the 
Western Balkans8 across the four pillars of: (i) gradual integration with the European Union’s 
single market; (ii) regional economic integration; (iii) fundamental reforms; and (iv) enhanced 
financial support. Bosnia and Herzegovina has been working on preparing its reform agenda, 
covering reform milestones in the areas of business environment and private sector 
development, the green and digital transitions, human capital, and the fundamentals of EU 
 
1  is presented in a renewed format and structure. Main ﬁndings of the report, together 
with the recommendations (previously grey assessment boxes) are brought together at the beginning of 
the report. Furthermore, under the fundamentals cluster, for better readability and comparability across 
all reports, certain data is provided (also) in the form of graphs. 
2 SWD (2019) 222 ﬁnal, COM(2019) 261 ﬁnal. 
3 European Council conclusions, 15 December 2022. 
4 COM(2022) 528 ﬁnal. 
5 COM(2023) 690 ﬁnal. 
6 COM(2024) 129 ﬁnal. 
7 European Council conclusions, 21 and 22 March 2024, paragraph 30. 
8 COM(2023) 691 ﬁnal. 
 
4 
 
accession. Bosnia and Herzegovina should urgently finalise its Reform Agenda and submit to 
the Commission for agreement.  
 
1.2. 
MAIN FINDINGS OF THE REPORT9  
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS  
Democracy  
The conduct of the elections is negatively affected by the discriminatory elements of the 
constitutional system and by the lack of integrity of the electoral process. Parliament needs to 
take measures to ensure that elections are conducted in line with European standards by 
implementing the recommendations of the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions (ODIHR), the 
Council of Europe Group of States against Corruption (GRECO) and relevant Venice Commission 
recommendations, and to ensure transparency of political party financing (Opinion key priority 
1). Political parties should respect the independence of the Central Election Commission. 
Parliament is able to exercise its powers in a broadly satisfactory way. Legislative assemblies 
increased legislative output. Parliamentary oversight over the executives remains weak. The 
Stabilisation and Association Parliamentary Committee met regularly (Opinion key priority 3).  
The institutions in charge of the integration process are broadly in place. Coordination on EU 
matters needs to be strengthened, including the role of the Directorate for European Integration 
(DEI). The Council of Ministers needs to improve the functioning of the coordination 
mechanism, to develop a national programme for the adoption of the EU acquis (Opinion key 
priority 2) and to urgently appoint the national IPA coordinator (NIPAC) under the Instrument for 
Pre-accession (IPA) III. The country should set up an operational negotiating structure following 
the European Council decision to open accession negotiations and appoint a chief negotiator.  
Governance is broadly satisfactory. The Council of Ministers took action to adopt EU-related 
reforms with tangible results prior to the Commission report in March 2024, although the 
positive reform dynamic has stalled since. The executives have little capacity for coordination 
and policy planning. Independent institutions remain weak. 
Civil society organisations operate in a constrained environment, in particular in the Republika 
Srpska entity. Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to ensure meaningful and systematic 
consultations with civil society as part of an inclusive policy dialogue and adopt a framework for 
the transparent funding of civil society organisations, thus ensuring an enabling environment for 
civil society (Opinion key priority 11).   
 
9 This report covers the period from 15 June 2023 to 1 September 2024. It is based on input from a 
variety of sources, including contributions from the government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, EU Member 
States, European Parliament reports and information from various international and non-governmental 
organisations. It also includes the results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other 
stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of law.  
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of 
preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress 
made during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, 
some progress, good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been 
used. 
 
5 
 
Public administration reform  
Bosnia and Herzegovina is in between an early stage and some level of preparation and made 
some progress in public administration reform (PAR), notably by (i) establishing the 
Coordinating Committee for PAR at prime ministers’ level; (ii) organising the first public 
financial management (PFM) dialogue in May 2024; (iii) conducting the public expenditure and 
financial accountability (PEFA) assessment and continuing implementation of the countrywide 
PFM Strategy; (iv) adopting the state-level civil service law in March 2024; and (v) establishing in 
October 2023 a forum of civil service agencies to steer civil service policy in a harmonised way. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to complete essential steps to improve the overall functioning of 
its public administration by ensuring a professional and depoliticised civil service and a 
coordinated, countrywide approach to policymaking (Opinion key priority 14). 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the coming 
year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ adopt and start implementing a credible and relevant action plan on the PAR strategic 
framework 2023-2027 at each level of government, increasing budgetary ownership in 
implementation; and strengthen the capacities of PAR coordinators; 
→ ensure coordinated and well-harmonised legislative alignment with the EU acquis across all 
levels of government through a harmonised methodology and by adopting the outstanding 
legal framework for countrywide sectoral strategic planning at state level; 
→ amend and adopt civil service laws in line with merit principles, at state, entity and cantonal 
level. 
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights  
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation to implement the EU acquis and 
European standards in the area of the judiciary and fundamental rights. Limited progress was 
made during the reporting period, including to address the related Opinion key priorities.  
Functioning of the judiciary  
Bosnia and Herzegovina is in between an early stage of preparation and having some level of 
preparation in the area of the judiciary. Limited progress was made on the functioning of the 
judiciary (Opinion key priority 6), including on addressing the findings of the expert report on 
rule of law issues (the ‘Priebe Report’)10. Persistent and evident signs of deterioration continue 
to require urgent measures to strengthen integrity and restore public trust in the judiciary. The 
poor functioning of the judicial system continued to undermine citizens’ rights and the fight 
against corruption. In January 2024, the obstruction to accessing personal data for external 
experts tasked with monitoring the asset declaration system were removed from the Law on the 
High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council (HJPC); the right of the HJPC to access additional 
information from natural and legal person still needs to be strenghthened. The draft new Law on 
the HJPC should be brought in line with the June 2024 interim opinion of the Venice 
Commission. Bosnia and Herzegovina should submit the revised draft for a follow-up opinion, 
and fully align the draft law with its recommendations before adoption by Parliament. The 
Republika Srpska entity assembly should swiftly appoint the two vacant judges to the 
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Republika Srpska entity should also fully 
 
10 The ‘Priebe Report’ is available online on the website of the EU Delegation to Bosnia and Herzegovina.  
 
6 
 
recognise and enforce the decisions of the Constitutional Court, repealing any legislation to the 
contrary.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially met and thus remain 
valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ urgently appoint the vacant constitutional judges, ensuring the full composition and 
functioning of the Constitutional Court; and, for the courts in general, consistently appoint 
judges based on merit, without prevalence of ethnic criteria, and appraise the performance 
of judges based on quality criteria; 
→ ﬁnalise and adopt the new laws on the HJPC and the Courts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in 
line with Venice Commission recommendations, including by ensuring the access of the 
HJPC to all information necessary to perform integrity checks; fully implement the integrity-
related provisions of the Law on the HJPC to establish a robust system of asset declaration 
veriﬁcation under close external monitoring;  
→ adopt a new justice sector reform strategy; register the sentences of international criminal 
tribunals in domestic criminal records; and effectively implement the revised national war 
crimes strategy, particularly by boosting regional cooperation. 
Fight against corruption  
Bosnia and Herzegovina is in between an early stage of preparation and having some level of 
preparation in the fight against corruption. Some progress was made during the reporting 
period (Opinion key priority 7). The state-level Law on the prevention of conflict of interest, 
adopted in March 2024, is a substantial step forward, although it is not yet fully in line with 
European standards. In June 2024, Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted a state-level strategy and 
action plan on anti-corruption. Legislation is still not harmonised across the country. Selective 
and non-transparent judicial follow-up in corruption cases of public resonance is a cause of 
significant concern, along with pressure and intimidation, as evidenced in a number of high-level 
cases. The track record on fighting corruption (including high-level corruption) remains weak 
due to operational inefficiency and political interference. Prosecutors’ offices however 
advanced in a number of investigations for high-level corruption cases. The number of final 
convictions in high-level cases remains very low, one notable exception being the final 
conviction in the Novalić et al case. Only in Sarajevo Canton is there efficient application of 
conflict of interest rules, verification of asset declarations and protection of whistle-blowers. 
Targeted risk assessments and dedicated measures are needed to address corruption in the 
most vulnerable sectors.  
In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ complete the legislative and institutional framework and step up implementation of the 
rules on prevention of conﬂict of interest and on the protection of whistle-blowers by 
adopting new legislation in line with European standards at all levels of government and 
aligning existing legislation with them;  
→ demonstrate progress towards establishing a track record on ﬁghting high-level corruption; 
improve cooperation between police and prosecutors’ oﬃces; 
→ professionalise corruption prevention bodies across the country. 
Fundamental rights  
 
7 
 
The general framework for fundamental rights is largely in place but needs to be improved. The 
country needs to urgently adopt constitutional and electoral reforms to ensure that all citizens 
are able to effectively exercise their political rights, notably bring the country’s Constitution into 
line with the Sejdić-Finci case law of the European Court of Human Rights (Opinion key priority 
4.f). Freedom of assembly remains restricted, and civil society is being targeted, in particular in 
the Republika Srpska entity. The entity government withdrew a draft law targeting civil society 
groups as ‘foreign agents’; such a legislative initiative should not be reintroduced, as it would 
mark a step backwards. Further progress is required across key priorities 9-13. The 
Commission’s recommendations from last year have not been implemented and remain valid. 
In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular:  
→ implement court rulings to end divided education; 
→ ensure full respect, protection and promotion of the freedom of assembly, association and 
expression, and refrain from further actions that adversely impact their exercise; 
→ harmonise and improve legislation against domestic and gender-based violence to meet 
international standards and align laws across the country with the Gender Equality Law to 
increase the public and political participation of women.  
Freedom of expression  
There is some level of preparation on freedom of expression. There was no progress in 
guaranteeing freedom of expression and of the media, and the protection of journalists (Opinion 
key priority 12). Political pressure, intimidation and harassment towards journalists continued, 
including physical and verbal attacks, with no appropriate institutional follow-up. Political 
influence over public broadcasters persists, and their financial sustainability is ever more in 
danger. The Law on the public broadcasting system remains unimplemented, and entity-level 
legislation is still not harmonised with this law. The criminal penalties for defamation in the 
Republika Srpska entity continue to severely impact freedom of expression and of the media and 
to have a chilling effect. Sarajevo Canton’s legislative initiative on sanctions for online ‘fake 
news’, if adopted, could be abused to restrict media freedom. Any such norms must fully 
respect freedom of expression standards.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should, in particular:  
→ ensure the protection of journalists and systematic institutional follow-up of threats and 
violence against them;  
→ ensure the ﬁnancial sustainability and political independence of public broadcasters and 
harmonise entity legislation with the state-level Law on the public broadcasting system;  
→ adopt legislation on media ownership transparency and criteria for public advertising; and 
ensure that defamation is decriminalised across the country.  
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security  
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation in this area. Some progress was made 
on Opinion key priorities 7 and 8, notably with the adoption of the Law on anti-money laundering 
and combating the financing of terrorism. Action plans for countering terrorism and preventing 
and countering violent extremism were also adopted at all levels. Migration management 
continued to improve. While broadly aligned with the EU acquis, legislation is often not 
 
8 
 
harmonised across the country, and institutional cooperation and coordination remain weak, 
leading to uneven implementation.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ take over responsibility for managing migration, including management of reception 
centres; ensure effective coordination of border management and migration management 
capacity; and guarantee access to quality and effective asylum procedures; 
→ improve civilian oversight mechanisms over all police forces; consistently appoint police 
directors based on merit;  
→ adopt the law on border control and the strategy and action plan on integrated border 
management 2024-2029 in line with the EU/Schengen acquis; continue to align with EU visa 
policy, in particular with regard to third countries presenting irregular migration or security 
risks to the EU, and introduce security measures to better screen visa-free arrivals. 
Fight against organised crime 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is between an early stage of preparation and having some level of 
preparation in the fight against organised crime. Some progress was made, notably with the 
adoption of legislation on anti-money laundering, enforcement operations supported by Europol, 
and improved coordination capacity in the Prosecutor’s Office. Systemic shortcomings remain 
in the operational cooperation and capacity of law enforcement agencies to investigate due to 
non-harmonised criminal legislation, weak institutional coordination and lack of resources. 
Financial investigations and asset seizures and confiscations remain insufficient. A proactive 
approach is essential to stop criminal infiltration in the political, legal and economic systems.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and 
therefore remain broadly valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular:  
→ adopt a 2024-2027 strategy on traﬃcking in human beings and amend legislation on 
migrant smuggling to better combat these two crimes; 
→ establish specialised multi-agency investigation teams for complex cases; setup an asset 
recovery oﬃce; improve mutual access to databases and timely exchange of information; 
strengthen ﬁnancial investigations;  
→ adopt a new law on personal data protection, as a precondition for an agreement on 
operational cooperation with Eurojust, and sign and ratify the latter; establish a ﬁrearms 
focal point; and align legislations on the possession of weapons by civilians. 
The existence of a functioning market economy 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation and has made limited progress in 
establishing a functioning market economy. Economic growth slowed down to about 1.6% in 
2023, mainly reﬂecting a deteriorating international environment. The labour market remained 
resilient, but a signiﬁcant outﬂow of workers is leading to labour shortages. The public sector 
continued to be ineﬃcient and oversized. The business environment suffers from a fragmented 
internal market and a weak rule of law. Political stalemates, a lack of cooperation among the 
various levels of government, and resistance from entities and cantons continued to delay 
necessary structural reforms. 
As the implementation of last year’s Commission recommendations was limited, they remain 
valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
 
9 
 
→ improve the business environment by simplifying business registration and licencing 
procedures and by harmonising and mutually recognising licences and certificates between 
entities; 
→ strengthen countrywide regulatory and supervisory institutions, bolster analytical and policy-
formulation capacity and publish complete and consistent countrywide data in a timely 
manner, in particular on public finances; 
→ increase the transparency and efficiency of the public sector, in particular by establishing a 
framework for better, depoliticised governance; improve tax collection by ensuring the 
effective exchange of information between tax authorities; and clarify the constitutional 
competence for establishing a registry of bank accounts of private individuals, in line with 
the EU acquis. 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is between an early stage of preparation and having some level of 
preparation and made limited progress concerning its capacity to cope with competitive 
pressure and market forces in the EU. The overall quality of education remains inadequate. The 
country continues to lag behind in the energy and digital transitions. However, some structural 
adjustment took place, with the focus of the country’s value added moving towards services 
such as trade, IT and tourism. Economic integration with the EU remains high, but overall trade 
is below potential.  
Last year’s recommendations have been partially implemented, and therefore remain valid. To 
support long-term growth, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ improve the quality of education and training, in particular accelerating the modernisation of 
curricula with a view to better alignment with labour market needs;  
→ increase the share of government capital spending in GDP, in particular by focusing on 
transport and energy infrastructure and on improving environmental standards;  
→ improve management of public investment and accelerate implementation of investment 
projects that have undergone a clear positive cost-benefit assessment. 
Chapter 5: Public procurement 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation in public procurement. There was some 
progress in adopting the 2024-2028 public procurement strategy and in amending the Law on 
public procurement on legal protection. Public procurement remains prone to irregularities and 
vulnerable to corruption. Selective and non-transparent judicial follow-up in cases of corruption 
in public procurement is a cause of significant concern. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ further align the public procurement law with the EU public procurement acquis, including on 
public-private partnerships and concessions; 
→ increase staﬃng levels and strengthen capacity in the Public Procurement Agency and the 
Public Procurement Review Body; 
→ develop the e-procurement system and increase its use to ensure transparency. 
 
10 
 
Chapter 18: Statistics 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation on statistics. Limited progress was 
made in the reporting period, mainly on environmental statistics. Bosnia and Herzegovina 
should improve cooperation, coordination, decision-making processes and the legal basis to 
develop the national statistical system and ensure progress in key areas. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partly implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ conduct the agricultural census ;  
→ adopt a roadmap for preparing the next population and housing census; 
→ ﬁnalise the classiﬁcation of regions equivalent to the NUTS classiﬁcation (Nomenclature of 
territorial units for statistics). 
Chapter 32: Financial control 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation in this area. Some progress  was made 
on: (i) advancing implementation of strategies on public internal financial control (PIFC) at state 
and entity level; (ii) producing consolidated reports while improving capacities for online 
reporting; and (iii) better training civil servants in charge of PIFC. External audit institutions at 
state level improved outreach on audit work and on  communication with civil society, and the 
Federation entity adopted a communication strategy on audit. Implementation of 
recommendations remains low at between 30-50%, and the operational, financial independence 
of Supreme Audit Institutions needs to be improved. Parliamentary scrutiny of audit work 
remains ineffective. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ improve managerial accountability by amending relevant regulations on managerial 
delegation of tasks to include not only ﬁnancial but also administrative responsibilities 
across public bodies; 
→ establish and improve the oversight function of the ﬁscal risk of public companies, 
particularly at entity level, and ensure data collection on the public internal ﬁnancial control 
of public companies at all levels of government via the relevant IT application; 
→ improve the implementation of state audit recommendations via stronger coordination 
among parliaments, audit authorities and governments at state and entity level. 
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET 
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation on the free movement of goods. No 
progress was made in this area. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ draw up a list of technical regulations in force and start to repeal the legislation and 
standards across the country that conflict with EU legislation and European standards; 
 
11 
 
→ adopt a countrywide strategy for quality infrastructure; 
→ examine all existing legislation and administrative practices in the non-harmonised area to 
assess if they comply with Articles 34-36 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European 
Union and start to plan how to address all non-compliant elements. 
Chapter 2: Freedom of movements for workers 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation on the free movement of workers. No 
progress was made in the reporting period due to the fragmentation of social security schemes, 
limited administrative capacity and lack of cooperation among authorities. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ start developing a countrywide database on vacancies; 
→ continue negotiating and concluding new bilateral agreements on social security, 
particularly with EU Member States. 
Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation on the right of establishment and 
the freedom to provide services. No progress was made in this area. The legislation needs to be 
aligned with the EU Services Directive. There is no mutual recognition of qualifications for 
regulated professions. A regulatory framework and countrywide strategy to develop the postal 
services need to be adopted, in line with the EU acquis. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ develop and adopt a countrywide law on services that is fully aligned with the EU Services 
Directive, including a point of single contact, and remove the remaining barriers to 
establishing a single economic space; 
→ develop and adopt a countrywide strategy and a countrywide law on postal services aligned 
with the EU acquis to gradually open the postal services market to competition, and 
strengthen institutional capacity to ensure compliance with new postal market rules; 
→ align legislation with the EU acquis on mutual recognition of professional qualiﬁcations, 
including with the Directive on recognition of professional qualiﬁcations and with the 
Directive on a proportionality test, before regulating any new profession. 
Chapter 4: Free movement of capital 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is moderately prepared on the free movement of capital. There was 
limited progress in aligning with the EU acquis, with the adoption of a new law and risk 
assessment on anti-money laundering and countering terrorism financing. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ reduce the requirements for short-term capital transactions and amend the legislation to 
comply with SAA commitments on the acquisition of real estate by EU citizens; 
 
12 
 
→ establish a countrywide central register of beneficial ownership information for legal 
persons and private individuals, and a register of beneficial ownership information for legal 
arrangements, in line with the EU acquis; 
→ adopt legislation to align with the Payment Services Directive 2, the Electronic Money 
Directive 2 and the Regulation on single euro area payments (SEPA). 
Chapter 6: Company law 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation on company law, corporate accounting 
and auditing. No progress was made in this area. Further efforts are needed to align with the EU 
acquis on company law, in particular on accounting and corporate sustainability reporting and 
to harmonise its requirements across the country. Different regional business registers operate 
independently and without coordination. There is still no single countrywide supervisory body to 
oversee statutory auditors. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ ﬁnalise the review of the existing legislation on company law to identify amendments 
needed to further align with the EU acquis; 
→ improve the connection and coordination of business registers among entities and the 
Brčko District; 
→ review the existing legislation on ﬁnancial and corporate sustainability reporting, 
transparency and statutory audit to identify the legislative amendments necessary to align 
with the EU acquis. 
Chapter 7: Intellectual property law 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is moderately prepared on intellectual property law. No  progress was 
made in this area. Although some preparations started, more efforts are required to align 
legislation with the EU acquis and improve enforcement and coordination. A new intellectual 
property strategy has not yet been adopted. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met and remain valid. In the 
coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ adopt and implement a new strategy on intellectual property and implement the strategy on 
the enforcement of intellectual property rights; 
→ further align the legal framework on copyright and related rights with the EU acquis and 
amend the Law on patents, trademarks and trade secrets; 
→ continue taking steps to increase coordination and capacity to enforce intellectual, industrial 
and commercial property rights and to strengthen collaboration with the European Union 
Intellectual Property Office. 
Chapter 8: Competition policy 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation on competition policy. There was no 
progress in this area. The country has not yet removed ethnic-based decision-making 
procedures and vetoes from the Competition Council and State Aid Council. 
 
13 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ amend the Law on competition and the Law on State aid to revise the voting procedures in 
line with the EU acquis (Opinion key priority 4.g); 
→ improve the enforcement record of the State Aid Council by ensuring that State aid 
measures are notified by granting authorities before they are approved; 
→ in line with the Stabilisation and Association Agreement, ensure that the State Aid Council 
operates independently and align the existing aid schemes with the EU acquis. 
Chapter 9: Financial services 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is between having some level of preparation and a moderate level of 
preparation on financial services. There was no progress in this area. Coordination in 
supervision and enforcement needs to significantly improve. The overall level of preparedness 
in the securities market remains low. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ continue the work towards full alignment of the banking regulation with the amended 
versions of the Capital Requirements Directive and Regulation and with the Bank Resolution 
and Recovery Directive; 
→ Continue efforts in aligning regulation of non-banking sectors, including the regulation on 
investment funds and on the financial market infrastructures; 
→ introduce consolidated supervision of banking groups and overall financial holdings, 
including across entities and in the Brčko District. 
Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation on consumer protection and public 
health. No progress was made in this area. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ align tobacco control legislation with the EU acquis at all levels and start enforcing it, and 
urgently ratify the protocol to eliminate illicit trade in tobacco products; 
→ further align state-level legislation with the acquis on all health-related issues, most urgently 
on substances of human origin and on medicines for human use, and establish an oversight 
system to ensure eﬃcient coordination across the whole country; 
→ further align the state-level Law on consumer protection and product safety with the EU 
acquis. 
 
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH 
Chapter 10: Digital transformation and media 
 
14 
 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation on digital transformation and the 
media. No progress was achieved. The legislation and strategic framework are not in place and 
are not aligned with the EU acquis. In June 2024, Bosnia and Herzegovina joined the Digital 
Europe Programme; the related agreement is yet to be ratified by Parliament.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ complete phase two of the digital switchover and adopt a framework strategy for access to 
the broadband network; 
→ develop and adopt a law on electronic identity and trust services for electronic transactions, 
with a single supervisory body for the whole country, in line with the EU Digital Identity 
Framework Regulation; develop a legislative framework on cybersecurity in line with the EU 
acquis; 
→ develop and adopt a law on electronic communications and electronic media in line with the 
EU acquis, in particular aligning legislations with the European Electronic Communications 
Code and the Audio-visual and Media Services Directive. 
Chapter 16: Taxation 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation on taxation. No progress was achieved 
in the reporting period. Countrywide harmonisation remains insufficient, hindering progress 
towards a single economic space. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ bring the legislation on the value added tax (VAT) and on excise duties in line with the EU 
acquis, particularly on excise duties on beer; 
→ make progress on putting in place the electronic signature (e-signature) in order to ensure 
interoperability of taxation services countrywide; 
→ start preparations for interconnection and interoperability with the related common EU 
taxation IT systems. 
Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation; limited progress was made under 
this chapter. A new governing board of the Central Bank was appointed in December 2023. 
Cooperation and coordination of macroeconomic and fiscal policies remain a challenge, as 
evidenced by the difficulties in preparing and carrying out the Economic Reform Programme 
(ERP). Monetary policy underpins economic stability, but the full independence of the Central 
Bank has yet to be ensured. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ maintain the integrity of the currency board arrangement and ensure the central bank’s full 
independence; 
→ strengthen the analytical capacities of all institutions responsible for ﬁscal accounting and 
planning, and improve procedures for preparing the ERP in order to ensure timely 
 
15 
 
submission and compliance with the requirements; 
→ adopt the global ﬁscal framework and the budgets of all levels of government in a timely 
manner. 
Chapter 19: Social policy and employment 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation in the area of social policy and 
employment. There was limited progress in this area. Serious challenges remain to be 
addressed as regards employment, social dialogue, social inclusion and protection, and on 
reducing poverty. Steps were taken by adopting a roadmap for the de-institutionalisation of 
children and establishing a Council for persons with disabilities. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ develop and adopt a countrywide employment strategy as a policy framework, while putting 
in place additional capacity for implementation and monitoring; 
→ ﬁnalise and adopt the Youth Guarantee implementation plan in line with the EU model and 
guidance, and prepare for the piloting to start in 2026; 
→ introduce a uniform minimum level of maternity leave beneﬁts and protection throughout 
the country, starting by harmonising the deﬁnitions of maternity, paternity and parental 
leave. 
Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy 
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains at an early stage of preparation in the area of enterprise and 
industrial policy. Limited progress was made with the adoption of entrepreneurial legislation in 
the entities and Brčko District. The investment environment remains unsatisfactory in spite of 
limited progress. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ adopt regulation allowing mutual recognition of licences and certiﬁcates between the 
entities and ensure that e-registration of companies and business registries across the 
country are interconnected and fully operational, including e-signature/e-stamps; 
→ adopt countrywide guidelines to harmonise SME support, aligned with the Small Business 
Act paying particular attention to implementing ﬁnancial support to start-ups and micro, 
small and medium-sized enterprises in the innovation and digital sector; 
→ accelerate improvements to the investment environment to attract sustainable investments 
that integrate with the domestic industrial tissue. 
Chapter 25: Science and research 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation on science and research. No progress 
was made. Research capacities remain very limited. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ develop a new strategy and action plan for scientiﬁc development; 
 
16 
 
→ develop and adopt a smart specialisation strategy; 
→ improve reporting on research and innovation statistics by reporting on at least 24 European 
Innovation Scoreboard indicators. 
Chapter 26: Education and culture 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation on education and culture. There was 
no progress in this area. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ extend and update the action plan for the national qualiﬁcations framework (NQF); 
→ ensure a fully functional system of (re-)accreditation of higher education institutions and 
study programmes across the country; 
→ ensure continued participation in international assessment studies11 and implement 
ﬁndings to improve PISA results. 
Chapter 29: Customs union 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation on customs union. Customs legislation 
is not fully aligned with the EU acquis. There was no progress in this area. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→  continue preparations to apply the common transit procedure and connect its transit 
system to the common IT infrastructure of the new computerised transit system (NCTS), 
and start preparations towards achieving interconnection and interoperability of its customs 
IT systems with the EU electronic customs environment;  
→ strengthen the administrative and operational capacity of the Indirect Taxation Authority; 
→ increase post-clearance checks based on risk analysis, expand use of simpliﬁed procedures 
for reliable economic operators and upgrade interconnectivity and interoperability with the 
EU’s IT systems and requirements. 
 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY 
Chapter 14: Transport policy 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation in this area, with no progress achieved 
in the reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ establish a lead agency for road safety and a countrywide system to collect data on road 
 
11 Programme for International Student Assessment – PISA, Trends in International Mathematics and 
Science Study – TIMSS, Progress in International Reading Literacy Study – PIRLS, International Computer 
and Information Literacy Study – ICILS, Teaching and Learning International Survey – TALIS. 
 
17 
 
crashes; 
→ bolster the independence, strengthen the capacity and ensure suﬃcient funding of all 
bodies at state and entity level in the area of transport; 
→ adopt a strategic framework and legislation to implement intelligent transport systems (ITS) 
on the core networks. 
Chapter 15: Energy 
The country remains at an early stage of preparation on energy. No progress was made. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ adopt gas and electricity laws and bylaws at state and entity levels in compliance with the 
third energy package and adopt and implement the electricity integration package, and 
ensure the full alignment of entity-level laws on electricity and gas to ensure coupling with 
the EU electricity market; 
→ adopt state-level legislation and improve entity-level legislation on renewable energy and 
energy eﬃciency in line with the Energy Community Treaty requirements; 
→ ﬁnalise and adopt the national energy and climate plan (NECP) 2021-2030, in line with the 
Energy Community 2030 energy and climate targets. 
Chapter 21: Trans-European Networks 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation on trans-European networks. There was 
limited progress in this area, with the continuation of the Corridor Vc motorway development.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ continue developing the planned extension of the TEN-T and TEN-E core networks in line 
with the identiﬁed priorities; 
→ accelerate the implementation of connectivity reform measures and continue to regularly 
adopt amended multiannual maintenance plans for the road and rail core networks; 
→ align the legislation with the EU acquis on guidelines for trans-European energy 
infrastructure. 
Chapter 27: Environment and climate change 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is between an early stage and some level of preparation on the 
environment and climate change and made limited progress. On environment, the Council of 
Ministers adopted a decision on the quality of liquid petroleum fuels, while on climate change 
Bosnia and Herzegovina still needs to adopt a state-level climate law and a countrywide climate 
strategy along with a 2050 climate neutrality target to align with the EU climate acquis. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ put in place an integrated action plan to ensure coordinated implementation of the 
 
18 
 
countrywide environmental approximation strategy and its monitoring, adopt a country-level 
climate law, and adopt countrywide environmental protection and climate strategies in line 
with the EU acquis; 
→ formalise a procedure for the merit-based, transparent appointment of a focal point for 
Bosnia and Herzegovina to ensure the country’s undisputed representation in environmental 
conventions to which Bosnia and Herzegovina is a signatory; 
→ update the nationally determined contribution (NDC) and urgently implement the monitoring, 
reporting, veriﬁcation and accreditation (MRVA) package, with a view to introducing carbon 
pricing and aligning with the EU emissions trading system (ETS). 
 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION 
Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation on agriculture and rural 
development; it made limited progress in this area. Bosnia and Herzegovina endorsed the 
‘Strategic plan for rural development of Bosnia and Herzegovina 2023-2027 – framework 
document’ in October 2024. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ adopt a multi-annual, country-wide strategy for agriculture and rural development, and 
harmonise support measures across the country in line with the EU acquis; 
→ adopt a state-level law on organic production, a state-level law on quality policy, as well as 
the implementing legislation on wine, in line with the EU acquis; 
→ set up the administrative structures required for the common agricultural policy. 
Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation in this area. No progress was made over 
the reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ introduce an inter-laboratory comparative test system as regular practice, particularly for 
notiﬁable diseases; increase the administrative capacity of inspection services and 
laboratories; and increase the number of checks; 
→ speed up preparation for national reference laboratories in hygiene, veterinary and 
phytosanitary inspections, and food and foodstuff analysis, in line with the EU acquis; 
→ adopt state-level laws on food, on animal health, on animal welfare and on plant health, in 
line with the EU acquis; adopt the OECD seed schemes, particularly for agricultural seeds 
and forestry. 
Chapter 13: Fisheries and aquaculture 
 
19 
 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation in this area; no progress was made. 
The country still needs to prepare, adopt and implement a countrywide fisheries and 
aquaculture strategy in line with the EU acquis. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ prepare and adopt a countrywide strategy on ﬁsheries and aquaculture with a view to 
aligning the legislation with the EU acquis; 
→ harmonise the methodology for data collection for ﬁsh and ﬁshery and aquaculture products 
across the country and establish the relevant statistics system. 
Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments 
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains at an early stage of preparation on regional policy and the 
coordination of structural instruments. No progress was made during the reporting period. 
Therefore, last year’s recommendations remain valid. 
In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should: 
→ develop and adopt a countrywide strategic framework guiding preparations for structural 
and cohesion funds and regional development; 
→ urgently appoint a national IPA coordinator (NIPAC) for the Instrument for Pre-accession 
Assistance (IPA) III with the authority and mandate to effectively coordinate the use of EU 
funds, and strengthen institutional and administrative capacity to manage EU funds; 
→ improve public investment management and adopt an updated single country project 
pipeline covering priority sectors, based on a sound, transparent and inclusive methodology. 
Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation on financial and budgetary 
provisions. No progress was made. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ strengthen capacity and inter-agency cooperation to combat tax and customs fraud; 
→ bolster the capacity of the Indirect Tax Authority to effectively implement customs 
legislation; 
→ adopt a master plan for the production of national accounts for Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
 
CLUSTER 6: EXTERNAL RELATIONS 
Chapter 30: External relations 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has reached some level of preparation on external relations. There 
was no progress in the last year and the capacity to tackle key challenges in trade policy has yet 
to be strengthened. 
 
20 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ ﬁnalise its accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO); 
→ implement the 2021-2024 Common Regional Market action plan, in particular by urgently 
implementing the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) additional protocol 5 on 
trade facilitation and the additional protocol 6 on trade in services,  take the necessary steps 
to implement additional protocol 7 on dispute settlement and implement actions under the 
new action plan for 2025-2028; 
→ start the process of establishing a development and humanitarian aid policy. 
Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation in the area of common foreign, security 
and defence policy. There was good progress, as Bosnia and Herzegovina reached and 
maintained full alignment with EU common foreign and security policy, notably on statements 
and restrictive measures following Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine. Implementation 
of restrictive measures remains a challenge due to political obstructions. Bosnia and 
Herzegovina continued to participate in EU crisis management missions and operations under 
the common security and defence policy. 
The recommendations from last year remain largely valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ maintain full alignment with EU common foreign and security policy, ensure thorough 
implementation of restrictive measures stemming from EU alignment, and make further 
efforts to close space for foreign interference and information manipulation; 
→ align legislation and procedures with EU standards on marking and deactivation of small 
arms and light weapons, including for seized and conﬁscated weapons; 
→ appoint a political director and European correspondent in the Ministry for Foreign Affairs. 
 
1.3 ASSESSMENT OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE STEPS SPECIFIED IN THE COMMISSION’S 
RECOMMENDATION FOR CANDIDATE STATUS   
Step 1: ensure a track record in the functioning at all levels of the coordination mechanism on EU 
matters, including by developing and adopting a national programme for the adoption of the EU 
acquis. 
The Directorate for European Integration finalised the programme for EU integration, and 
submitted it to the European Commission in March 2024. This programme for EU integration is 
a key step towards putting in place the national programme for the adoption of the EU acquis 
(NPAA); it should be revised in line with the Commission comments provided, in view of 
agreement with the Commission on the NPAA. The Council of Ministers should urgently appoint 
the national IPA coordinator (NIPAC) for IPA III. 
Step 2: adopt, as a matter of priority, integrity amendments in the existing Law on the High Judicial 
and Prosecutorial Council.