3 
 
1. INTRODUCTION1 
1.1. 
CONTEXT  
Bosnia and Herzegovina applied for EU membership in February 2016. The Commission 
adopted an Opinion2 on the membership application in May 2019, setting out 14 key 
priorities. In December 2022, the European Council granted Bosnia and Herzegovina 
candidate country status3 on the understanding that eight steps specified in the 
Commission’s recommendation4 are taken. Following the Commission’s recommendation5, 
the European Council decided in March 2024 to open accession negotiations with Bosnia 
and Herzegovina. The European Council invited the Commission to prepare the negotiating 
framework with a view to its adoption by the Council the moment all relevant steps set out in 
the Commission’s recommendation of October 2022 have been taken6.  
Although the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to publicly declare their 
political commitment to the strategic goal of European integration, the reform dynamic 
stalled in the reporting period, and only a very limited number of reforms were adopted (laws 
on border control and on data protection, and Frontex status agreement). Bosnia and 
Herzegovina has to return its focus to adopting reforms in line with the EU acquis and 
European standards, addressing all the relevant steps.  
The reporting period was marked by severe political tensions and escalation, particularly 
from the Republika Srpska entity, that run counter to the EU path of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
Following the first-instance criminal conviction of Republika Srpska entity President Milorad 
Dodik, the entity assembly adopted laws undermining the constitutional and legal order of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the functionality of State institutions, and fundamental rights. 
These laws were later repealed by the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
Following a criminal conviction in appeal, Milorad Dodik was removed from office and an 
interim President appointed; early elections for the entity president are scheduled for 23 
November 2025. Following the end of the ruling coalition, lengthy negotiations and untimely 
conditions to form a new government did not lead to a reshuffle, hindering the functioning of 
the executive and legislature in the reporting period.  
Bosnia and Herzegovina showed some engagement towards implementing the Growth Plan 
for the Western Balkans across its four pillars of: (i) gradual integration with the EU single 
market; (ii) regional economic integration; (iii) fundamental reforms; and (iv) increased 
financial support. In the absence of a Reform Agenda, in July 2025 the European 
 
1 This report covers the period from 1 September 2024 to 1 September 2025. It is based on input from 
a variety of sources, including contributions from the government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, EU 
Member States, European Parliament reports and information from various international and non-
governmental organisations. It also includes the results of comparative assessments and indices 
produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of law.  
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level 
of preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe 
progress made during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, 
limited progress, some progress, good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim 
steps have also been used. 
2 SWD (2019) 222 ﬁnal, COM(2019) 261 ﬁnal. 
3 European Council conclusions, 15 December 2022. 
4 COM(2022) 528 ﬁnal. 
5 COM(2024) 129 ﬁnal. 
6 European Council conclusions, 21 and 22 March 2024, paragraph 30. 
 
4 
 
Commission reduced by 10% the indicative allocation for the country. Bosnia and 
Herzegovina adopted a Reform Agenda and submitted it to the European Commission for 
agreement in September 2025.  
1.2. 
MAIN FINDINGS OF THE REPORT  
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS  
Democracy  
The general framework for elections requires substantial reforms. Constitutional reforms are 
needed to ensure political equality and non-discrimination for all citizens. Electoral integrity 
needs to be improved, in line with recommendations of international bodies. Political parties 
should respect the independence of the Central Electoral Commission (CEC).  
Parliament can exercise its powers in only a partially effective way. Legislative output 
decreased. Oversight over the executives also remained weak. The Republika Srpska entity 
assembly adopted in February several laws in breach of the legal and constitutional order, 
which were subsequently repealed in May by the Constitutional Court. 
Governance is increasingly unsatisfactory. Presidency members continued to present 
diverging stances. The functioning of the Council of Ministers deteriorated with the end of 
the ruling coalition, and a new Minister of Security remains to be appointed. The executives 
have little capacity for coordination and policy planning. Independent institutions remain 
weak. All levels of government show signs of political capture, directly affecting the daily life 
of citizens. The Republika Srpska entity should fully recognise and enforce the decisions of 
the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and swiftly appoint judges to the two 
vacant positions on the Constitutional Court. 
The institutions in charge of the EU integration process are broadly in place. The Council of 
Ministers needs to: (i) strengthen the role of the Directorate for European Integration (DEI); 
(ii) develop a national programme for the adoption of the EU acquis (NPAA); (iii) facilitate 
policy dialogue within the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) bodies; and (iv) 
urgently appoint the national IPA coordinator (NIPAC) under the Instrument for Pre-
accession (IPA) III. Following the European Council decision to open accession negotiations, 
the country needs to appoint an operational chief negotiator with a view to the screening 
process. 
Civil society organisations operate in a constrained environment. In particular, in the 
Republika Srpska entity, criminal penalties for defamation and a new law targeting civil 
society groups as ‘foreign agents’ (subsequently repealed by the Constitutional Court) further 
restricted the space for civil society. Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to ensure meaningful 
and systematic consultations with civil society as part of an inclusive policy dialogue and 
adopt a framework for the transparent funding of civil society organisations, thus ensuring 
an enabling environment for civil society (Opinion key priority 11). 
Public administration reform  
Bosnia and Herzegovina is between an early stage of preparation and having some level of 
preparation in public administration reform. It made limited progress in this area during the 
reporting period, in particular by: (i) developing a new action plan for 2023-2027, now 
pending adoption; and (ii) continuing to implement at all levels the strategy for the reform of 
public financial management. Reforms to the country’s revenue administration also 
improved tax collection. On the civil service, the Federation entity government and its 
cantons continued to implement the 2022-2027 strategy for the development of human 
resource management and to develop transparent monitoring on human resources. Bosnia 
and Herzegovina needs to complete essential steps to improve the overall functioning of its 
 
5 
 
public administration by ensuring both a professional and depoliticised civil service, and a 
coordinated, countrywide approach to policymaking (Opinion key priority 14). 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented during the 
reporting period and remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in 
particular: 
→ adopt and start implementing a credible and relevant action plan for the 2023-2027 
strategic framework on public administration reform at each level of government, 
increasing budgetary funds for the implementation of this action plan; and strengthen the 
capacities of public administration reform coordinators at all levels; 
→ ensure coordinated and well-harmonised legislative alignment with the EU acquis across 
all levels of government in particular by adopting the outstanding legal framework for 
countrywide sectoral strategic planning at State level; 
→ amend and adopt civil service laws in line with the principle of merit-based employment 
at State, entity and cantonal level. 
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights  
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation to implement the EU acquis and 
European standards in the area of the judiciary and fundamental rights. No progress was 
made during the reporting period, including on addressing the related Opinion key priorities.  
Functioning of the judiciary  
Bosnia and Herzegovina is between an early stage of preparation and having some level of 
preparation and no progress was made on the functioning of the judiciary (Opinion key 
priority 6), including on addressing the findings of the expert report on rule of law issues (the 
‘Priebe Report’)7. The poor functioning of the judicial system continued to undermine 
citizens’ rights and the fight against corruption. Legislative reforms and integrity checks are 
key to rebuilding public trust in the justice system. The Republika Srpska entity is expected 
not to implement any law repealed by the Constitutional Court, in particular the law on a 
separate judiciary council.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met and thus remain valid. In 
the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ urgently appoint judges to the vacant positions on the Constitutional Court, ensuring its 
full composition and functioning; and, for the courts in general, consistently appoint 
judges based on merit, without prevalence of ethnic criteria, and appraise the 
performance of judges based on quality criteria; 
→ ﬁnalise and adopt a Law on the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council (HJPC) and a 
Law on the Courts of Bosnia and Herzegovina in line with Venice Commission 
recommendations, also ensuring the access of the HJPC to all information necessary to 
perform integrity checks; fully implement the integrity-related provisions of the Law on 
the HJPC to establish a robust system of asset declaration veriﬁcation under close 
external monitoring;  
→ adopt a new justice sector reform strategy; complete the registration of sentences of 
international criminal tribunals in domestic criminal records; and implement effectively 
the revised national war crimes strategy, particularly by boosting regional cooperation. 
 
7 The ‘Priebe Report’ is available online on the website of the EU Delegation to Bosnia and 
Herzegovina.  
 
6 
 
Fight against corruption  
Bosnia and Herzegovina is between an early stage of preparation and having some level of 
preparation in the fight against corruption (Opinion key priority 7). No progress was made. 
Political authorities failed to tackle widespread corruption and actively obstructed progress, 
leading to long-term stagnation and increasing signs of State capture. The State-level Law on 
the prevention of conflict of interest is still not implemented effectively. The Federation entity 
finally set up specialised anti-corruption departments, after 11 years of delay. Anti-corruption 
legislation is still not harmonised across the country. No action was taken to remedy 
operational inefficiency and political interference (including pressure and intimidation) which 
have led to selective and non-transparent judicial follow-up to corruption cases of public 
resonance. As a result, the track record on fighting corruption remains weak, with very few 
convictions, in particular in high-level cases. Rules on conflicts of interest, verification of 
asset declarations and protection of whistle-blowers either do not exist or continue not to be 
enforced effectively across the country. The Sarajevo Canton demonstrated tangible results 
in these areas. Targeted risk assessments and dedicated measures are needed to address 
corruption in the most vulnerable sectors.  
The Commission's recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. 
In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ complete the legislative and institutional framework across the country in line with 
European standards and step up implementation of the rules on prevention of conﬂicts of 
interest and the protection of whistle-blowers;  
→ demonstrate progress towards establishing a track record of proactive investigations, 
prosecutions and convictions in high-level corruption; in this context, improve 
cooperation between the police and prosecutors’ oﬃces; 
→ professionalise corruption prevention bodies across the country by ensuring their 
permanent status and upholding their ﬁnancial and operational independence. 
Fundamental rights  
The general framework for fundamental rights is largely in place but needs to be improved. 
The country needs to urgently adopt constitutional and electoral reforms to ensure that all 
citizens are able to effectively exercise their political rights, notably bring the country’s 
Constitution into line with the Sejdić-Finci case law of the European Court of Human Rights 
(Opinion key priority 4.f), as well as implement relevant decisions of the Constitutional Court. 
Further progress is required across key priorities 9-13. In March 2025 the Federation entity 
adopted a Law on protection from domestic violence and violence against women, and 
amended its criminal code in July 2025, improving alignment with the Istanbul Convention 
and the EU acquis. In February 2025 the Republika Srpska adopted a law targeting civil 
society groups as ‘foreign agents’, which undermined fundamental rights and was repealed 
by the Constitutional Court in May. The Constitutional Court’s decision needs to be 
respected.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year have not been implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular:  
→ implement court rulings to end divided education (‘two schools under one roof’); 
→ ensure full respect, protection and promotion of the freedom of assembly, association 
and expression, and refrain from actions that may adversely impact the exercise of these 
freedoms; 
→ harmonise and improve legislation against domestic and gender-based violence to meet 
 
7 
 
international standards and align laws across the country with the Gender Equality Law to 
increase the public and political participation of women.  
Freedom of expression  
There is some level of preparation in the area of freedom of expression. No progress was 
achieved during the reporting period, including in guaranteeing freedom of expression and of 
the media, and the protection of journalists (Opinion key priority 12). Bosnia and Herzegovina 
continues to experience deep stagnation in media freedom, with worrying signs of 
deterioration. The financial sustainability of public broadcasters is ever more in danger. A 
countrywide network was set up to monitor cases of violence against journalists. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. 
In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should, in particular:  
→ ensure the protection of journalists and systematic institutional follow-up to threats and 
violence against them;  
→ ensure the ﬁnancial sustainability and political independence of public broadcasters and 
harmonise entity legislation with the State-level Law on the public broadcasting system;  
→ adopt legislation on both transparency in media ownership and criteria for public 
advertising; and ensure that defamation is decriminalised across the country.  
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security  
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation in the area of justice, freedom and 
security. Some progress was made in this area, including on Opinion key priorities 7 and 8, in 
particular with: (i) the adoption of the Law on border control and the Law on personal data 
protection; (ii) the signature of the roadmap for cooperation with the European Union Agency 
for Asylum (EUAA) and the signature of the Frontex status agreement; and (iii) the adoption 
of the strategy and action plan on integrated border management. Migration management 
continued to improve. While broadly aligned with the EU acquis, legislation is often not 
harmonised across the country, and institutional cooperation and coordination remain weak, 
leading to uneven implementation.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and 
therefore remain broadly valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in 
particular: 
→ take over responsibility for managing migration, including by adopting and implementing 
a comprehensive transition plan on migration management and the rulebook on the 
management of reception centres; guarantee access to quality and effective asylum 
procedures;  
→ adopt the action plan on ﬁghting traﬃcking in human beings and amend legislation on 
migrant smuggling;  
→ further align with EU visa policy, in particular for non-EU countries presenting irregular 
migration or security risks to the EU, develop a passenger data-exchange (API) system, 
and introduce security measures to better screen visa-free arrivals. 
Fight against serious and organised crime 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is between an early stage of preparation and having some level of 
preparation in the fight against serious and organised crime. Some progress was made, in 
particular with: (i) the adoption of the strategy on trafficking in human beings and the 
strategy and action plan on small arms and light weapons (SALW); and (ii) enforcement 
operations supported by Europol. However, systemic shortcomings continue to hinder the 
 
8 
 
operational cooperation and investigative capacity of law-enforcement agencies due to 
fragmented criminal legislation, poor institutional coordination and insufficient resources. 
Financial investigations and asset seizures and confiscations remain insufficient. A 
proactive approach is essential to stop criminal infiltration in the political, legal and 
economic systems, and to tackle the political capture of law-enforcement institutions.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented, and 
therefore remain broadly valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in 
particular:  
→ establish specialised multi-agency investigation teams for complex cases; set up an 
asset recovery oﬃce and put in place capacities for the management of crime proceeds 
at State level; strengthen ﬁnancial investigations;  
→ improve civilian oversight mechanisms over all police forces; consistently appoint police 
directors based on merit;  
→ further align the legislation to combat terrorism, possession of weapons by civilians, and 
explosives with the EU acquis; establish a ﬁrearms focal point; establish a list of 
criminalised psychoactive substances.  
ECONOMIC CRITERIA 
The existence of a functioning market economy  
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation – and there was no progress 
during the reporting period – in establishing a functioning market economy. Economic 
activity remained resilient despite a deteriorating political situation, with GDP growth slowing 
down to 2.6% in 2024, and to about 1.7% in the first half of 2025. Employment growth 
decelerated further, while a significant outflow of workers from the country continued to 
result in labour shortages and created upward pressure on wages. Economic and fiscal 
governance deteriorated as a result of politically motivated blockages in policy 
implementation, a very short-term-oriented policy approach and a deteriorating cooperation. 
The business environment continues to suffer from a highly fragmented internal market and 
a deterioration in the rule of law. Political stalemate continued to delay necessary decisions 
and structural reforms that would have been needed to improve the functioning of the 
market economy. 
Last year’s Commission recommendations remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ improve the business environment by both: (i) simplifying business registration and 
licencing procedures; and (ii) harmonising and mutually recognising licences and 
certiﬁcates between entities;  
→ strengthen countrywide regulatory and supervisory institutions, bolster analytical and 
policy formulation capacity and publish complete and consistent countrywide data in a 
timely manner, in particular on public ﬁnances; 
→ increase the transparency and eﬃciency of the public sector, in particular by putting in 
place a framework for better and depoliticised governance; and clarify the constitutional 
competence for setting up a registry of bank accounts of private individuals, in line with 
the EU acquis. 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the EU  
Bosnia and Herzegovina is between an early stage of preparation and having some level of 
preparation in its capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces in the EU. It 
 
9 
 
made no progress in this area during the reporting period. The overall quality of education 
remains inadequate. The country continues to lag behind in the energy and digital 
transitions. Economic integration with the EU remains high, but overall trade with the EU is 
below potential.  
The implementation of last year’s recommendations has remained limited, and therefore last 
year’s recommendations remain valid. To support long-term growth, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
should in particular: 
→ improve the quality of education and training, in particular by accelerating the 
modernisation of curricula to better match skills with labour market needs;  
→ increase government capital spending as a percentage of GDP, in particular by focusing 
on transport and energy infrastructure and improving environmental standards;  
→ improve the management of public investment and accelerate the implementation of 
investment projects that have undergone a clear, positive cost-beneﬁt assessment. 
Chapter 5: Public procurement 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation in public procurement. Limited 
progress was made in this area during the reporting period by putting in place a strategic 
framework on public procurement. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. 
In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ further align the Law on public procurement with the EU public procurement acquis; 
develop a roadmap to harmonise the legal framework on public-private partnership and 
concessions with EU standards, including measures for improved coordination; 
→ develop the e-procurement system and increase its use to ensure transparency; 
→ increase staﬃng levels and strengthen capacity in the Public Procurement Agency and 
the Public Procurement Review Body. 
Chapter 18: Statistics 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation on statistics. Limited progress 
was made in the reporting period, mainly in the areas of information and communication 
technology (ICT) and environmental statistics. Bosnia and Herzegovina should improve 
cooperation, coordination, decision-making processes and the legal basis to develop the 
national statistical system, and ensure progress in key areas. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented during the 
reporting period and remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in 
particular: 
→ conduct the agricultural census;  
→ adopt a roadmap for preparing the next population and housing census; 
→ ﬁnalise the classiﬁcation of regions equivalent to the NUTS classiﬁcation (nomenclature 
of territorial units for statistics). 
Chapter 32: Financial control 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation in financial control. There was 
limited progress during the reporting period in improving the effectiveness and productivity 
of: (i) internal audit functions; (ii) risk management; and (iii) irregularity management. 
 
10 
 
External audit institutions improved their outreach activities in the reporting period, but 
parliamentary scrutiny of the implementation of recommendations needs to be improved. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented during the 
reporting period and remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in 
particular: 
→ improve managerial accountability by introducing the delegation of decision-making 
responsibilities to senior civil servants at entity level and implementing related 
regulations  at State level more effectively; 
→ set up and improve the oversight function for identifying ﬁscal risk in public companies, 
particularly at entity level, and ensure data collection on the public internal ﬁnancial 
control (PIFC) of public companies at all levels of government via the relevant IT 
application; 
→ improve the implementation of State audit recommendations via stronger coordination 
among parliaments, audit authorities and governments at State and entity level. 
 
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET 
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation on the free movement of goods. 
No progress was made in this area during the reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented during the 
reporting period and remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in 
particular: 
→ draw up a list of technical regulations on the free movement of goods that are currently 
in force and start to repeal legislation and standards across the country that conflict with 
EU legislation and European standards in this area; 
→ adopt a countrywide strategy for quality infrastructure; 
→ examine all existing legislation and administrative practices in the non-harmonised area 
to assess whether they comply with Articles 34-36 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the 
European Union and plan how to address all non-compliant elements. 
Chapter 2: Freedom of movements for workers 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation in the freedom of movement for 
workers. No progress was made in this area due to the fragmentation of social security 
schemes, limited administrative capacity, and lack of cooperation among authorities. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ start developing a countrywide database on vacancies; 
→ continue negotiating and concluding new bilateral agreements on social security, 
particularly with EU Member States. 
→ start preparing for the alignment of legislation with the EU acquis on free movement of 
workers, access for EU citizens to the labour market and on equal treatment of EU 
citizens with nationals in the labour market. 
Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services 
 
11 
 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation on the right of establishment and 
the freedom to provide services. No progress was made in this area during the reporting 
period.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented during the 
reporting period and remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in 
particular: 
→ develop and adopt a countrywide law on services that is fully aligned with the EU 
Services Directive, including by setting up a point of single contact; and remove the 
remaining barriers to setting up a single economic space; 
→ ﬁnalise and adopt a countrywide strategy and a countrywide law on postal services 
aligned with the EU acquis to gradually open the postal services market to competition, 
and strengthen institutional capacity to ensure compliance with new rules on the postal 
market; 
→ align legislation with the EU acquis on mutual recognition of professional qualiﬁcations, 
including with the Directive on recognition of professional qualiﬁcations and with the 
Directive on a proportionality test, before regulating any new profession. 
Chapter 4: Free movement of capital 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is moderately prepared in the area of free movement of capital. 
There was no progress in aligning with the EU acquis in this area during the reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented during the 
reporting period and remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in 
particular: 
→ expand the scope of, simplify procedures for, and reduce administrative requirements 
related to short-term capital transactions, and amend its legislation to comply with SAA 
commitments on the acquisition of real estate by EU citizens; 
→ set up a countrywide central register of beneficial ownership of corporate and other legal 
entities, in line with the EU acquis; 
→ adopt legislation to align with the Payment Services Directive 2, the Electronic Money 
Directive 2 and the Single Euro Payment Area (SEPA) Regulation. 
Chapter 6: Company law 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation in the area of company law. No 
progress was made in this area during the reporting period. Further efforts are needed to 
align with the EU acquis and to harmonise requirements across the country. Different 
regional business registers operate independently and without coordination. There is still no 
single countrywide supervisory body to oversee statutory auditors. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented during the 
reporting period and therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
should in particular: 
→ ﬁnalise the review of existing legislation on company law to identify amendments needed 
to further align with the EU acquis; 
→ improve the connection and coordination of business registers among the entities and 
the Brčko District; 
 
12 
 
→ ﬁnalise the review of all the existing legislation on ﬁnancial reporting, transparency, and 
statutory audit to identify the legislative amendments necessary to align with the EU 
acquis. 
Chapter 7: Intellectual property law 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is moderately prepared on intellectual property law. No progress 
was made in this area during the reporting period. Although some preparations started 
during the reporting period, more efforts are required to align legislation with the EU acquis 
and improve enforcement and coordination.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met during the reporting period 
and remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ adopt and implement a new strategy on intellectual property and implement the existing 
strategy on the enforcement of intellectual property rights (IPRs); 
→ further align the legal framework on copyright and related rights with the EU acquis;  
→ amend the Law on patents, trade marks and trade secrets to align it with the EU acquis. 
Chapter 8: Competition policy 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation on competition policy. There was no 
progress in this area during the reporting period. The country has not yet removed ethnic-
based decision-making procedures and vetoes from the Competition Council and State Aid 
Council (Opinion key priority 4.g). 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented during the 
reporting period and remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in 
particular: 
→ amend the Law on competition and the Law on State aid to revise decision-making 
procedures in order to remove ethnic-based veto rights in line with the EU acquis; 
→ improve the enforcement record on State aid by ensuring that State aid measures are 
notified by the granting authorities to the State Aid Council before they are approved; 
→ in line with the SAA, ensure that the State Aid Council operates independently and align 
the existing aid schemes with the EU acquis. 
Chapter 9: Financial services 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is between having some and a moderate level of preparation on 
financial services. There was no progress in this area during the reporting period. 
Coordination in supervision and enforcement needs to significantly improve. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented during the 
reporting period and remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in 
particular: 
→ continue the work towards full alignment of its banking regulations with the EU acquis; 
→ continue efforts to align with the EU acquis its regulation on non-banking sectors, 
including insurance, investment funds, securities markets and financial market 
infrastructures; 
→ introduce consolidated supervision of banking groups and overall financial holdings 
across the whole country. 
Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection 
 
13 
 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation on consumer protection and 
public health. No progress was made in this area during the reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented during the 
reporting period and remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in 
particular: 
→ further align the State-level Law on consumer protection and product safety with the EU 
acquis; 
→ align its tobacco-control legislation with the EU acquis at all levels of government and 
enforce it, and urgently ratify the protocol to eliminate the illicit trade in tobacco products; 
→ further align State-level legislation with the EU acquis on all health-related issues, most 
urgently on substances of human origin and on human and veterinary medicinal products 
as well as in the area of e-Health, and put in place an oversight system to ensure eﬃcient 
coordination across the whole country. 
 
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH 
Chapter 10: Digital transformation and media 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation on digital transformation and 
media. No progress was achieved in this area.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ complete phase two of the digital switchover and adopt a framework strategy for access 
to the broadband network; 
→ develop and adopt a law on electronic identity and trust services for electronic 
transactions, in line with the EU Digital Identity Framework Regulation; and develop a 
legislative framework on cybersecurity in line with the EU acquis;  
→ develop and adopt a law on electronic communications and electronic media in line with 
the EU acquis. 
Chapter 16: Taxation 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation on taxation. No progress was 
achieved in this area. Countrywide harmonisation remains insufficient, hindering progress 
towards a single economic space. Bosnia and Herzegovina should avoid any further 
deviation from the EU acquis in this area. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. 
In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ bring in line with the EU acquis its legislation on value added tax (VAT) and excise duties, 
particularly on beer and on energy products; 
→ reduce the administrative burden related to electronic signature (e-signature) 
functionality to ensure the countrywide interoperability of taxation services; 
→ start preparations for interconnection and interoperability with the common EU IT 
systems for taxation. 
Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy 
 
14 
 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation on economic and monetary 
policy. No progress was made in this area during the reporting period. Cooperation and 
coordination of macroeconomic and fiscal policies remain a challenge, as evidenced by the 
difficulties in preparing and carrying out the Economic Reform Programme (ERP). Monetary 
policy underpins economic stability, but the full independence of the Central Bank has yet to 
be ensured. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ maintain the integrity of the currency board arrangement and ensure the Central Bank’s 
full independence; 
→ further strengthen the analytical capacities of all institutions responsible for ﬁscal 
accounting and planning, and improve procedures for preparing the ERP in order to 
ensure timely submission and compliance with the requirements; 
→ adopt the global ﬁscal framework and the budgets of all levels of government in a timely 
manner. 
Chapter 19: Social policy and employment 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation on social policy and employment. 
There was no progress in this area. Serious challenges remain to be addressed in 
employment, social dialogue, social inclusion, social protection, and reducing poverty. The 
country should continue aligning with the EU acquis on non-discrimination and equality, 
including gender equality. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ adopt a countrywide employment strategy, putting in place additional capacity for 
implementation and monitoring;  
→ ﬁnalise and adopt the Youth Guarantee implementation plan in line with the EU model 
and guidance, and prepare for piloting the plan to start in 2026;  
→ introduce a uniform minimum level of beneﬁts and protection for maternity leave 
throughout the country, starting by harmonising the deﬁnitions of maternity, paternity and 
parental leave. 
Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy 
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains at an early stage of preparation in the area of enterprise 
and industrial policy. Limited progress was made in this area during the reporting period with 
the adoption and implementation of legislation on entrepreneurial infrastructure in the 
entities and in Brčko District. The investment environment remains unsatisfactory. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ adopt regulation allowing for the mutual recognition of licences and certiﬁcates between 
the entities and ensure that e-registration of companies and business registries across 
the country are interconnected and fully operational, including e-signature/e-stamps; 
→ take ﬁrst steps towards aligning with the late payments directive; 
→ accelerate improvements to the investment environment to attract sustainable 
investments that integrate with the domestic industrial base. 
 
15 
 
Chapter 25: Science and research 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation on science and research. No 
progress was made in this area during the reporting period. Research capacities remain very 
limited.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ develop a new strategy and action plan for scientiﬁc development and develop and adopt 
a smart specialisation strategy; 
→ improve participation in the Horizon Europe programme; 
→ improve reporting on research and innovation statistics by reporting on at least 24 
European Innovation Scoreboard indicators. 
Chapter 26: Education and culture 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation on education and culture. There 
was limited progress in this area during the reporting period. A draft qualifications 
framework was drawn up in December 2024. The Council of Ministers adopted in December 
2024 an action plan for improving quality assurance in education. Bosnia and Herzegovina 
needs to ensure a fully functional system of accreditation and re-accreditation of higher 
education institutions and study programmes across the country. Bosnia and Herzegovina 
did not regularly participate in international assessment studies in the past five years. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partly implemented and therefore 
remain broadly valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ develop a national qualiﬁcations framework (NQF) referenced to the European 
qualiﬁcations framework; 
→ implement the action plan to improve quality assurance with a view to joining the 
European Association for Quality Assurance (ENQA);  
→ ensure continued participation in international assessment studies8, intensifying 
preparations to join the 2029 Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 
and implement ﬁndings to improve PISA results. 
Chapter 29: Customs union 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation on customs union. There was some 
progress in this area during the reporting period related to the preparation to join the 
Common Transit Convention. Customs legislation is not fully aligned with the EU acquis. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ continue preparations to apply the common transit procedure; connect its transit system 
to the common IT infrastructure of the new computerised transit system; and start 
preparations towards achieving interconnection and interoperability of its customs IT 
systems with the EU’s electronic customs environment;  
 
8 Programme for International Student Assessment – PISA, Trends in International Mathematics and 
Science Study – TIMSS, Progress in International Reading Literacy Study – PIRLS, International 
Computer and Information Literacy Study – ICILS, Teaching and Learning International Survey – 
TALIS. 
 
16 
 
→ strengthen the administrative and operational capacity of the Indirect Taxation Authority 
and combating customs fraud, in particular smuggling of tobacco products, by 
cooperating with the European Anti-Fraud Oﬃce (OLAF); 
→ increase post-clearance checks based on risk analysis, expand use of simpliﬁed 
procedures for reliable economic operators and upgrade interconnectivity and 
interoperability with the EU’s IT systems and requirements. 
 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY 
Chapter 14: Transport policy 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation in transport policy. No progress was 
achieved in the reporting period in this area. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ set up a lead agency for road safety and a countrywide system to collect data on road 
crashes; 
→ bolster the independence of, strengthen the capacity of, and ensure suﬃcient funding for 
all bodies at State and entity level in the area of transport; 
→ adopt a strategic framework and legislation to implement intelligent transport systems 
(ITS) in road transport. 
Chapter 15: Energy 
The country remains at an early stage of preparation on energy. No progress was made in 
this area during the reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ adopt gas and electricity laws and bylaws at State and entity levels in compliance with 
the EU’s third energy package, adopt and implement the electricity integration package, 
and ensure the full alignment of entity-level laws on electricity and gas to ensure coupling 
with the EU electricity market; 
→ adopt State-level legislation and improve entity-level legislation on renewable energy and 
energy eﬃciency in line with the requirements of the Energy Community Treaty; 
→ adopt the national energy and climate plan (NECP) 2021-2030, in line with Energy 
Community targets. 
Chapter 21: Trans-European networks 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation on trans-European networks. There 
was limited progress in this area during the reporting period, mainly with the continuation of 
works  across six sections of the Corridor Vc motorway. There was no development during 
the reporting period in the area of energy networks.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ continue developing the planned extension of the TEN-T and TEN-E networks in line with 
the identiﬁed priorities; 
→ accelerate the implementation of connectivity reform measures and continue to regularly 
 
17 
 
adopt amended multiannual maintenance plans for the road and rail core networks; 
→ align its legislation with the EU acquis on guidelines for trans-European energy 
infrastructure. 
Chapter 27: Environment and climate change 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is between an early stage of preparation and having some level of 
preparation in the area of environment and climate change. No progress was made in this 
area during the reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ ensure coordinated implementation and monitoring of the countrywide environmental 
approximation strategy, and formalise a procedure for the merit-based and transparent 
appointment of a focal point for Bosnia and Herzegovina in environmental conventions; 
→ adopt a State-level climate law and countrywide environmental protection and climate 
strategies and action plans in line with the EU acquis; submit a new nationally determined 
contribution to the UNFCCC; and urgently align with the EU acquis on monitoring, 
reporting, verification and accreditation (MRVA). 
→ adopt the required legislation at all levels of governance and action plans to introduce the 
single European emergency number 112 across the country. 
 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION 
Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation on agriculture and rural 
development and made no progress in this area. The implementation of the ‘Strategic plan 
for rural development 2023-2027 – framework document’, adopted in October 2024, has not 
advanced.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ adopt a multiannual, countrywide strategy for agriculture and rural development, and 
harmonise support measures across the country in line with the EU acquis; 
→ adopt a State-level law on organic production, a State-level law on quality policy, and 
implementing legislation on wine, in line with the EU acquis; 
→ set up the administrative structures required for the common agricultural policy. 
Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation in this area. No progress was made 
over the reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ introduce an inter-laboratory comparative test system as regular practice, particularly for 
notiﬁable diseases; increase the administrative capacity of oﬃcial controls authorities 
and laboratories; and increase the number of oﬃcial controls; 
→ speed up preparation for national reference laboratories in hygiene, veterinary and 
 
18 
 
phytosanitary inspections, and in food/foodstuff analysis, in line with the EU acquis; 
→ adopt legislation on food, on animal health, on animal welfare and on plant health, in line 
with the EU acquis; adopt the OECD seed schemes, particularly for agricultural seeds and 
forestry; and prepare a plan to upgrade establishments producing food, feed and animal 
by-products to meet EU structural standards. 
Chapter 13: Fisheries and aquaculture 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation in this area, and no progress was 
made during the reporting period.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ prepare and adopt a countrywide strategy on ﬁsheries and aquaculture to align its 
legislation with the EU acquis; 
→ harmonise the methodology for data collection for ﬁsh and ﬁshery/aquaculture products 
across the country and set up the relevant statistics system. 
Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments 
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains at an early stage of preparation in regional policy and the 
coordination of structural instruments. No progress was made during the reporting period.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented, and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ develop and adopt a countrywide strategy guiding preparations for structural and 
cohesion funds and regional development; 
→ urgently appoint a national IPA coordinator (NIPAC) for the Instrument for Pre-Accession 
(IPA) III, and strengthen institutional and administrative capacity to manage EU funds; 
→ improve public investment management and adopt an updated single-country project 
pipeline covering priority sectors, based on a sound, transparent and inclusive 
methodology. 
Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation on financial and budgetary 
provisions. Limited progress was made in this area, mainly in improving the capacity of the 
Indirect Tax Authority (ITA) and in implementing an accounting system for customs duties. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year in this area were partially implemented 
and remain broadly valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ strengthen capacity and inter-agency cooperation to combat tax and customs fraud; 
→ further improve the capacity of the Indirect Tax Authority to implement effectively the 
customs legislation; 
→ adopt a master plan for the production of national accounts for Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
 
CLUSTER 6: EXTERNAL RELATIONS 
Chapter 30: External relations 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation in external relations. No progress 
 
19 
 
was made in this area during the reporting period. The capacity to tackle key challenges in 
trade policy has yet to be strengthened. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ ﬁnalise its accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO); 
→ fully implement the 2021-2024 Common Regional Market action plan (in particular by 
urgently implementing the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) additional 
protocol 5 on trade facilitation and the additional protocol 6 on trade in services); take 
the necessary steps to implement additional protocol 7 on dispute settlement; and 
implement actions under the new action plan for 2025-2028; 
→ start the process of establishing a development and humanitarian aid policy. 
Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation in the area of common foreign, 
security and defence policy. There was some progress in this area during the reporting 
period as Bosnia and Herzegovina maintained full alignment with the EU’s common foreign 
and security policy, in particular on statements and restrictive measures following Russia’s 
war of aggression against Ukraine. Bosnia and Herzegovina also appointed a political 
director and a European correspondent. However, the implementation of restrictive 
measures still faces significant hindrances by those ministries and bodies controlled by the 
SNSD party, which are also stepping up cooperation with Russian counterparts. The 
Republika Srpska entity authorities continue to maintain frequent contacts with Russia at the 
highest levels.  
The recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore remain largely 
valid. In the coming year, Bosnia and Herzegovina should in particular: 
→ ensure thorough implementation of EU restrictive measures the country has aligned with, 
and make efforts to close the space for foreign information manipulation and 
interference (FIMI); 
→ align legislation and procedures with EU standards on the marking and deactivation of 
small arms and light weapons, including for seized and conﬁscated weapons;  
→ adopt a new foreign policy strategy. 
 
1.3 ASSESSMENT OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE STEPS SPECIFIED IN THE COMMISSION’S 
RECOMMENDATION FOR CANDIDATE STATUS 
Step 1: ensure a track record in the functioning at all levels of the coordination mechanism on 
EU matters, including by developing and adopting a national programme for the adoption of the 
EU acquis. 
The Directorate for European Integration finalised the programme for EU integration, and 
submitted it to the European Commission in March 2024. This programme for EU integration 
is a key step towards putting in place the national programme for the adoption of the EU 
acquis (NPAA); it should be revised in line with the Commission comments provided in May 
2024, in view of agreement with the Commission on the NPAA. The Council of Ministers 
should urgently appoint the national IPA coordinator (NIPAC) for IPA III. 
Step 2: adopt, as a matter of priority, integrity amendments in the existing Law on the High 
Judicial and Prosecutorial Council.