3 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION  
1.1. 
CONTEXT  
Following its application for EU membership in February 2016, Bosnia and Herzegovina has 
to fulfil 14 key priorities set out in the Commission Opinion1 of May 2019 which covers 
democracy/functionality, the rule of law, fundamental rights, and public administration 
reform. This is required for the Commission to recommend opening EU accession 
negotiations with Bosnia and Herzegovina. On the basis of the December 2019 conclusions of 
the EU Council, the Commission focuses its annual reports on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s 
implementation of the 14 key priorities2.  
In June 2022 the European Council expressed its readiness to grant the status of candidate 
country to Bosnia and Herzegovina and to that aim it invited the Commission to report on the 
implementation of the 14 key priorities set out in its Opinion with special attention to those 
which constitute a substantial set of reforms in order for the European Council to revert to 
decide on the matter. The Commission will continue to monitor  Bosnia and Herzegovina’s 
implementation of the 14 key priorities and report based on further progress on the ground 
(also see Annex I).   
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to implement the Stabilisation and Association 
Agreement (SAA) which, together with its Interim Agreement applied since 2008, has 
enabled progressive trade liberalisation with the EU and mutual duty-free access for most 
goods.  
The public commitment of political parties to the strategic goal of European integration 
has been further confirmed in Brussels in June 2022 in a political agreement on principles for 
ensuring a functional Bosnia and Herzegovina that advances on the European path, in line 
with the 14 key priorities set out in the Commission Opinion. Yet, for most of the reporting 
period this commitment was not turned into concrete reform actions. Deep political 
polarisation and disagreement among the main parties of the ruling coalition led to a 
standstillin the work of the democratic institutions and on reforms on the EU path. Until 
spring 2022 political parties based in the Republika Srpska entity blocked legislative and 
executive institutions at state level and adopted initiatives to unilaterally take over state 
competences at entity level, in breach of the constitutional and legal order; the same parties 
also obstructed the implementation of EU restrictive measures on Russia with which Bosnia 
and Herzegovina had formally aligned. Institutions started to return to functioning in Spring 
2022, and some steps were taken afterwards to start address the backlog of reforms. 
Political parties did not agree on constitutional and electoral reforms. Parliament rejected 
the integrity package on electoral standards, which were later imposed by the OHR.  
Parliament also rejected rule of law reforms, including on conflicts of interest and on 
integrity in the judiciary, which remain pending and are expected to be adopted following the 
re-initiation of the legislative procedure by the Ministry of Justice. The High Representative 
for Bosnia and Herzegovina (OHR) resorted four times to its executive powers, including on 
electoral standards and financing. The policy dialogue with the EU was also blocked until 
June 2022, as the joint bodies under the SAA could not meet. Bosnia and Herzegovina 
adopted the state budget only in July 2022 after an 18-month delay. In August 2022 the 
Parliament amended the public procurement law, an important step contributing to 
                                                            
1 SWD(2019) 222 final, COM(2019) 261 final 
2https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2019/12/10/council-conclusions-on-commission-
opinion-on-bosnia-and-herzegovina-s-application-for-membership-of-the-european-union/ 
 
4 
 
addressing key priority 7. Bosnia and Herzegovina joined the Union Civil Protection 
Mechanism as a full member in September 2022. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina received the first instalment of EUR 125 million in favourable 
macro-financial assistance loans from the Commission in October 2021. The disbursement 
of the second instalment was cancelled in June 2022 because the country did not implement 
the agreed policy conditions.  
The country is the only one in the Western Balkans that did not introduce a countrywide 
COVID-19 certificate, equivalent to the EU Digital COVID-19 Certificate (EU DCC).  
1.2. 
SUMMARY OF THE REPORT3  
As regards political criteria, parties based in the Republika Srpska entity blocked state-level 
legislative and executive institutions until spring 2022, leading to an almost complete 
standstill in reforms during that period. The Federation entity government remained in office 
for the full 2018-2022 term in a caretaker capacity. During a significant part of the reporting 
period, the Republika Srpska entity pursued to unilaterally take over state competences 
(including on taxation, the judiciary, defence and security) and dismantle state institutions, 
endangering the country’s EU accession perspective as set out in the Commission Opinion. 
Some legislative steps were taken to withdraw the Republika Srpska entity from key state 
bodies and set up parallel bodies at entity level; these laws are suspended and under 
constitutional review. 
Parliamentary parties could not agree on a solution for constitutional and electoral reforms to 
bring the Constitution in line with the European Convention on Human Rights, complying 
with the Sejdić-Finci and related rulings, despite an intense facilitation of talks by the EU and 
US. Amendments to improve electoral standards were rejected in Parliament. A number of 
Constitutional Court decisions have yet to be fully enforced. The Council of Ministers took no 
steps to develop a national programme for the adoption of the EU acquis. Due to political 
obstruction, the Ministry of Finance and Treasury hindered the smooth organisation of the 
October 2022 elections by withholding the required funds. General elections took place on 2 
October; according to the preliminary findings of OSCE/ODIHR, they were overall 
competitive and well organised but marked by mistrust in public institutions and ethnically 
divisive rhetoric. On the same day, the High Representative imposed significant amendments 
to the constitution of the Federation entity and to the Bosnia and Herzegovina election law, 
aimed at addressing a number of functionality issues and the timely formation of authorities. 
No progress was made in ensuring an enabling environment for civil society. Republika 
Srpska entity authorities and parties advocated for a neutral stance on Russia’s aggression 
against Ukraine, contesting the country’s alignment with EU statements and obstructing the 
full implementation of restrictive measures against Russia. The Presidency ratified several 
international agreements, including on IPA III, Horizon and Creative Europe, and the Union 
Civil Protection Mechanism. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation and made limited progress on 
public administration reform (PAR). Notably, positive steps were taken in the area of 
                                                            
3 This report covers the period from June 2021 to June 2022. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from Bosnia and Herzegovina, the EU Member States, European Parliament reports and 
information from various international and non-governmental organisations. This also includes the results of 
comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of law.  
The report uses the following assessment scales to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of 
preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made 
during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some 
progress, good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, also interim steps have been used. 
 
5 
 
public finance management: (i) a comprehensive and countrywide public finance management 
(PFM) strategy was adopted, which now needs to be implemented; (ii) each level of 
government started implementing PFM strategies; (iii) state institutions improved some 
professional trainings; and (iv) and the Federation entity amended its administrative 
procedures. However, the lack of a political decision-making body to steer PAR and 
insufficient implementation of the action plan and capacities to promote the PAR agenda 
undermine the well-functioning of the public administration across all levels of government. 
Civil service laws are not harmonised with each other and with merit principles, while 
monitoring on human resource management does not allow to check on any irregularities. In 
line with Opinion’s key priority 14, the country needs to complete essential steps on public 
administration reform by ensuring  a professional and depoliticised civil service and a 
coordinated countrywide approach to policy-making, while establishing a political decision-
making body to steer PAR. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of preparation as regards its judiciary. No 
progress was made in this area over the reporting period. The independence and impartiality 
of the judiciary did not improve. Executive and legislative authorities failed to adopt 
additional safeguards. Inconsistency and overly broad discretion persist in applying the rules 
on appointment, disciplinary responsibility, career advancement and conflict of interest of 
judges and prosecutors. The Chief Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the chief 
prosecutor of Republika Srpska were demoted on account of disciplinary offences during the 
reporting period. The Parliament  rejected the amendments on integrity to the law on the High 
Judicial and Prosecutorial Council (HJPC) that would create a credible and rigorous system 
for verifying the financial statements of judicial office holders. The Republika Srpska entity 
launched a legislative initiative to set up a separate judicial and prosecutorial council at entity 
level; if adopted, it would violate the legal and constitutional order. Urgent measures are 
needed to restore public trust in the judiciary and strengthen its integrity. The lack of political 
commitment to judicial reform and the poor functioning of the judicial system continued to 
undermine the citizens’ enjoyment of rights and the fight against corruption and organised 
crime. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage/has some level of preparation in the prevention of 
and fight against corruption and organised crime. No progress was made in this area over 
the reporting period. The Parliament rejected a law on conflict of interest. Political leaders 
and judicial institutions failed to tackle widespread corruption and actively blocked progress, 
leading to long-term stalling and increasing signs of political capture. The continued lack of 
progress at all levels increases the risk of backsliding. Political leaders and judicial 
institutions need to urgently remedy the situation. Although in the reporting period there have 
been some indictments pertaining to high-level corruption sentences, the overall track record 
on preventing and repressing corruption (including at high level) remains insignificant, due to 
operational inefficiency and political interference. There are systemic shortcomings in the 
operational cooperation between law enforcement agencies fighting organised crime, due to 
non-harmonised criminal legislation, weak institutional coordination, and a very limited 
exchange of intelligence. Criminal organisations operating in the country take advantage of 
legal and administrative loopholes. The police are vulnerable to political interference. 
Financial investigations and asset seizures are also largely ineffective. A proactive approach 
remains fundamental to countering criminal infiltration in the political, legal and economic 
systems. The contact point for cooperation with Europol is still not operational; preparatory 
steps are underway. There is no systematic cooperation with Eurojust. Bosnia and 
Herzegovina needs to continue its efforts in the fight against terrorism and drug trafficking 
 
6 
 
and increase its capacity to do so. A new law on anti-money laundering and terrorism 
financing in line with the EU acquis needs to be urgently adopted.  
While the legislative and institutional framework on fundamental rights is largely in place, 
there is no comprehensive strategic framework. Adopting action plans for the social inclusion 
of the Roma in April 2022 and on the rights of LGBTIQ persons in July 2022 are positive 
steps in this regard. Significant reforms are still needed to ensure that all citizens are able to 
exercise their political rights and to ensure non-discriminatory, inclusive and quality 
education for all, including by overcoming the practice of ‘two schools under one roof’. No 
progress was made to guarantee freedom of expression and of the media by protecting 
journalists from threats and violence and ensuring the financial sustainability of the public 
broadcasting system. Challenges persist as regards freedom of assembly, particularly in the 
Republika Srpska entity. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has taken significant steps to improve migration management. The 
Ministry of Security continued efforts to improve coordination with local authorities and 
boosted international cooperation. However, major weaknesses still undermine the provision 
of necessary assistance. Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to urgently adopt the strategy and 
action plan on migration, step up efforts to ensure access to asylum, and strengthen border 
management. 
As regards economic criteria, Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage of establishing a 
functioning market economy. Cooperation and coordination of economic policymaking at 
state level and among the entities have further deteriorated. As a result, the country’s internal 
market remains fragmented. The country’s Economic Reform Programme does not contain 
sufficient credible countrywide measures to address the major structural economic challenges. 
These relate to the business environment, the informal economy, public enterprises, the green 
and digital transitions and unemployment. Overall, the country’s economic performance 
remains below its potential, as policymaking is hindered by political stalemate, an overly 
short-term orientation, and no focus on policy measures to build growth.  
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains at an early stage in terms of capacity to cope with 
competitive pressure and market forces in the EU and did not make significant progress in 
this area. The quality of education has remained low, while insufficient action was taken to 
improve the transport and energy infrastructure. The trade and transport sectors both grew in 
terms of their relative economic importance (in value-added terms) as a response to strong 
external demand, while the size of the public sector in the economy was slightly lower by the 
same measure.  
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an early stage/has some level of preparation in its ability to take 
on the obligations of EU membership. The country needs to significantly step up alignment 
with the EU acquis and implement and enforce the necessary legislation. Limited to no 
progress was made on the different EU acquis chapters during the reporting period.  
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation and made some progress in the area of 
public procurement as amendments adopted in August have further aligned the legislation 
with the EU acquis. This is a first important step on the commitments taken on 12 June and 
contributes to address key priority 7. There was limited progress was made on statistics; 
preparations for the next census have hardly progressed and the production of macroeconomic 
statistics continues to deviate from the EU acquis. Some progress was made on public internal 
financial control, with both entities adopting strategies. 
Major steps are needed to align the legal framework across the country with the EU acquis on 
the internal market (free movement of goods, workers, services and capital, company law, 
 
7 
 
intellectual property, competition policy, and financial services, consumer and health 
protection). Bosnia and Herzegovina made limited or no progress in this cluster. Procedures 
and legislation that differ between the entities create obstacles to competitiveness and growth. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina should bolster financial stability by improving coordination among 
the relevant authorities and setting up a financial stability fund as part of the bank resolution 
framework. This cluster is key for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s preparations to meet the EU 
single market requirements and is very important for early integration with and the 
development of the Common Regional Market. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina made limited or no progress in most areas of competitiveness and 
inclusive growth (taxation, digital transformation and media, social policy and employment, 
enterprise and industrial policy, science and research, education and culture) and some 
progress in the area of customs union. The country showed backsliding in other areas 
(economic and monetary policy) where it is at an early stage or has some level of preparation. 
These areas have significant links to the country’s Economic Reform Programme. Bosnia and 
Herzegovina needs to introduce socio-economic reforms to address structural weaknesses 
(including low competitiveness and high unemployment), and the impact of the COVID-19 
pandemic.  
Bosnia and Herzegovina made some or limited progress in the green agenda and sustainable 
connectivity cluster, where the country is at an early stage on energy, environment and 
climate change. The country has some level of preparation in the areas of transport and of 
trans-European networks. Further steps are needed on connectivity reform measures and in 
aligning with the Trans-European Transport Network (TEN-T) and Trans-European Networks 
for Energy (TEN-E) Regulations. The green transition and sustainable connectivity are key to 
economic integration within the region and with the EU. The implementation of the Economic 
and Investment Plan4 and the Green Agenda for the Western Balkans,5 needs to be 
accelerated. Bosnia and Herzegovina significantly improved its civil protection system and 
showed a clear commitment in the area of disaster management; in September 2022 the 
country joined the Union Civil Protection Mechanism (UCPM) as a full member. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina made no progress in the areas of resources, agriculture and 
cohesion (agriculture and rural development, food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy, 
fisheries, and financial and budgetary provisions), where preparation is mostly at an early 
stage. The country must step up its efforts to prepare and adopt a post-2021 countrywide 
strategy for rural development, align its legislation on food safety, veterinary and 
phytosanitary policy and strengthen its administrative capacities. More efforts are also needed 
to prepare and adopt a countrywide strategy on fisheries and aquaculture and harmonise data 
collection. Furthermore, Bosnia and Herzegovina should start preparing a countrywide 
regional development strategy. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has some level of preparation and made some progress in the cluster 
on external relations, in particular by improving its alignment with EU foreign policy 
statements and restrictive measures, which increased to 81% by end August 2022. The 
country needs to implement the additional protocols to the Central European Free Trade 
Agreement (CEFTA) on trade facilitation and trade and services, and swiftly adopt the 
additional protocol on dispute settlement. Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to actively 
participate in regional cooperation and to maintain good neighbourly relations.   
                                                            
4 COM(2020) 641 final 
5 SWD(2020) 223 final 
 
8 
 
In 2021, Bosnia and Herzegovina benefited from EUR 73 million under the Instrument for 
Pre-accession Assistance 2021 – 2027 (IPA III), providing support to programmes in 
migration and border management, the electoral process, energy, transport, employment and 
social protection, as well as private sector and regional development. This first set of 
programmes, complemented by a package of multi-country programmes, significant 
contributes to kick-starting implementation of the Economic and Investment Plan for the 
Western Balkans and the Green Agenda. Adopting countrywide sector strategies remains a 
key requirement for Bosnia and Herzegovina to benefit fully from IPA funding in the future. 
2. 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS  
2.1. 
FUNCTIONING OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 
REFORM  
2.1.1  Democracy  
During the reporting period, the political environment was marked by deep polarisation and 
obstructions, which gravely affected the functioning of state institutions and their capacity to 
adopt the reforms needed to fulfil the Opinion key priorities and advance on the EU path. 
Institutions started to return to functioning in Spring 2022, but the backlog of reforms has not 
been addressed. In the political agreement they signed in Brussels on 12 June 2022, party 
leaders committed to an ambitious agenda of reforms, in line with the 14 key priorities, to 
advance decisively on its EU path following the 2 October general elections. No state budget 
was adopted in 2021, and in 2022 the budget was only adopted on 30 June. State institutions 
have been funded via three-monthly temporary financing decisions for 18 months, during 
which they have been unable to make investments, since available funds are shrinking in real 
terms, and to recruit and retain sufficient and qualified personnel.  
In July 2021, political parties based in the Republika Srpska entity decided not to participate 
in decision-making at state level, effectively blocking all political institutions (Presidency, 
Council of Ministers and Parliamentary Assembly) for most of the reporting period.  
There was backsliding on key priority 4, which calls among others to ensure legal certainty on 
the distribution of competences across levels of government. In December 2021, the 
Republika Srpska entity adopted a plan to unilaterally take over state competences, in breach 
of the constitutional and legal order. In February 2022, the entity adopted a law on immovable 
property; the High Representative suspended its entry into force in April 2022, pending 
constitutional review; the entity leadership committed to enforce it anyway, which would 
endanger legal certainty. An entity law on medicines and medical devices, adopted in October 
2021, came into force in late June; its application was suspended by the Constitutional Court 
in July. A draft law on an entity-level judicial and prosecutorial council, in breach of the 
constitutional and legal order, is in parliamentary procedure in the Republika Srpska entity; its 
adoption would further jeopardise the independence of the judiciary. In May 2022 the 
Constitutional Court confirmed that entities have no right to unilaterally withdraw consent 
from agreements to transfer specific competences to the state level.  
The Federation government completed one full additional term in a caretaker capacity. 
Women remain under-represented at all levels of participation and decision-making. 
Elections  
No progress was made towards addressing Opinion key priority 1 on electoral standards. 
Despite intense facilitation, political parties were unable to agree on reforms to bring the 
Constitution and electoral framework in line with the European Convention on Human Rights. 
While the Central Electoral Commission introduced some improvements via by-laws, the