3 
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
1.1. CONTEXT 
The EU-Kosovo Stabilisation and Association Agreement has been in force since April 2016. 
Kosovo adopted a revised 2023-2027 national programme for EU integration. Kosovo 
submitted an application for EU membership in December 2022. The authorities remain 
committed to Kosovo’s European path.  
The Commission’s proposal to lift the visa requirements for Kosovo citizens was agreed by the 
Council and the European Parliament, with adoption of the relevant regulation taking place on 
9 March 2023 in the Council and on 18 April 2023 in the European Parliament. Visa 
liberalisation for Kosovo citizens is scheduled to enter into force on 1 January 2024. 
The EU-facilitated Dialogue on normalisation of relations between Kosovo and Serbia 
continued in the reporting period with regular meetings on the level of Chief Negotiators and 
Leaders. After months of intense negotiations and with the support of key partners, the Parties 
reached an Agreement on the Path to Normalisation in Brussels on 27 February 2023, and 
agreed on its Implementation Annex in Ohrid, North Macedonia, on 18 March 2023. Both 
Kosovo and Serbia are yet to start implementation of their respective obligations stemming 
from the Agreement, which are binding for the Parties and part of their European paths.  
Kosovo has continued to condemn Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine and to support 
Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. The government has continued 
to adopt packages of restrictive measures against Russia and Belarus, mirroring those imposed 
by the EU and the US.  
1.2. SUMMARY OF THE REPORT1  
The government led by Vetëvendosje still holds a solid majority in the Assembly and continued 
to push ahead with its ambitious EU reform agenda.  
However, the continued lack of cross-party cooperation and disagreements within the majority 
proved to be a challenge to reforms. Additionally, Srpska Lista members of the Assembly 
boycotted the Assembly’s work. Nevertheless, the reporting period witnessed important 
legislative achievements, including electoral reform.  
Overall, Kosovo has remained engaged in the EU-facilitated Dialogue on the normalisation 
of relations with Serbia, but it needs to demonstrate more serious commitment, invest more 
efforts and make compromises to take the process of normalisation of relations with Serbia 
forward. Kosovo needs to uphold its Dialogue commitments and commit to the full 
implementation of all past Dialogue agreements and the Agreement on the Path to 
Normalisation and its Implementation Annex. Kosovo and Serbia are expected to engage more 
constructively to enable negotiations on the comprehensive legally binding normalisation 
Agreement to start and show flexibility in order to make rapid and concrete progress. 
Normalisation of relations is an essential condition on the European path of both Parties and 
 
1 This report covers the period from June 2022 to June 2023. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from the government of Kosovo, the EU Member States, European Parliament reports and 
information from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also includes the results of 
comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of law.  
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of preparation, 
moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made during the reporting 
period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, good progress and 
very good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been used. 
 
4 
 
both risk losing important opportunities in the absence of progress.  
The situation in the north of Kosovo has been affected by several crises of varying intensity on 
a number of issues, with a violent attack against Kosovo Police on 24 September 2023, 
constituting the gravest escalation in recent years. Huge quantities of small arms and light 
weapons (SALW) were found in the context of this attack2. The EU expects the perpetrators to 
be apprehended and swiftly brought to justice and Serbia to fully cooperate and take all the 
necessary steps in this regard.Other crises during the reporting period were triggered by issues 
over the freedom of movement, in particular licence plates, following the Kosovo 
government’s decision on 29 June 2022 to enforce the re-registration of all vehicles with 
Kosovo-issued licence plates. This led to the tensions in July 2022 and continued through the 
erection of roadblocks and the collective resignation of Kosovo Serbs from Kosovo institutions 
in November 2022. Following the withdrawal of Kosovo Serbs from Kosovo institutions, local 
by-elections were organised in the four municipalities in the north of Kosovo. Scheduled 
initially for December 2022 and then postponed to 23 April 2023, the mayoral and municipal 
by-elections were held in line with the legal framework of Kosovo and efforts were made for 
them to take place in a smooth and orderly manner. However, despite the milestone Agreement 
on the path to normalisation reached in Brussels on 27 February and its Implementation Annex 
agreed in Ohrid, North Macedonia, on 18 March 2023, and despite Kosovo extending the 
deadline for the registration of candidatures for the local by-elections, not all parties and 
communities made use of their democratic right to participate and vote. The very low turnout 
(3.47% of voters), following the boycott by the Kosovo Serb community, showed that these 
elections do not offer a long-term political solution for these municipalities. It remains 
imperative to restore a situation where Kosovo Serbs participate actively in local governance, 
policing and the judiciary in the north of Kosovo. Early local elections need to be held as soon 
as possible in all four municipalities, organised in a fully inclusive manner, and with the 
unconditional participation of Kosovo Serbs. 
Due to the lack of decisive steps to de-escalate, and in line with the 3 June statement, the EU 
is implementing a number of measures vis-à-vis Kosovo, which also impact financial support. 
These measures are temporary and fully reversible, depending on the steps taken to de-escalate 
the tensions in the north of Kosovo. Kosovo has taken steps in the right direction, but more 
remains to be done.   
On public administration reform, as last year’s recommendations have not been sufficiently 
implemented. New legislation on public officials and salaries was approved by the Assembly 
using fast-track procedures. The law on salaries is currently under review by the Constitutional 
Court. The amended Law on public officials risks creating and exacerbating existing gaps in 
administrative capacities. 
Kosovo is still at an early stage in developing a well-functioning judicial system. There was 
limited progress during the reporting period. The need remains to strengthen existing tools 
safeguarding the integrity, accountability, independence and efficiency of the justice system. 
The Minister of Justice and the heads of the main justice system institutions signed a Joint 
Commitment Statement and Action Plan on justice reforms. Quick follow-up is needed to 
achieve tangible results. 
Kosovo is in between an early stage and some level of preparation in the fight against 
corruption. Limited progress was made during the reporting period, and corruption remains 
an issue of concern. While last year the Assembly adopted significant anti-corruption 
 
2 The EU and Western Balkan partners agreed in May 2023 to prolong beyond 2024 the Roadmap for a 
comprehensive small arms and light weapons control in the Western Balkans. 
 
5 
 
legislation and the legal framework on criminal confiscation is advanced, a lot remains to be 
done to implement the anti-corruption legislation. Despite improvement in the performance of 
the Agency for Prevention of Corruption, the anti-corruption preventive tools laid down in the 
legislation are not yet fully used. Kosovo should step up efforts to have more proactive 
investigations, final court decisions and final confiscation of assets.  
Kosovo is at an early stage in the fight against organised crime. Limited progress was made 
on the investigation and prosecution of organised crime cases. Kosovo adopted a new police 
organisational structure and upgraded intelligence and analysis capacities. Law enforcement 
operations against organised crime continued. Despite this, the powerful tools envisaged by the 
Criminal Code and the Law on extended powers of confiscation are yet to be fully utilised. 
Fighting organised crime in the north of Kosovo continues to be challenging. 
Kosovo remained active in the fight against terrorism and the fight against and prevention of 
violent extremism. The legal framework on anti-terrorism is partly aligned with the EU acquis 
and international standards. The Law on combating money laundering and the financing of 
terrorism is yet to be amended. The authorities need to be more effective in their efforts to 
combat money laundering. 
The legal framework broadly guarantees the protection of human and fundamental rights in 
line with European standards. While the capacity to monitor implementation of policies and 
legislation has improved, further efforts are required to effectively enforce fundamental rights. 
More human and financial resources should be allocated to relevant institutions. Efforts 
continued to improve gender equality but Kosovo needs to further strengthen implementation 
of legislation.  
Kosovo has a well-established legal framework for the protection of non-majority community 
rights. However, further action is needed on long-standing issues such as lack of equal access 
to education and employment, lack of language compliance, and low representation in public 
institutions, including for the Roma and Ashkali communities3. 
Kosovo has some level of preparation as regards freedom of expression. Limited progress was 
made in addressing the recommendations of the previous report. Concerns remain regarding 
physical attacks and threats, public smear campaigns and hate speech. The lack of freedom of 
expression in the north of Kosovo is particularly concerning. 
The Kosovo authorities continued to make progress in managing migration and have engaged 
with the EU on the implementation of the EU Action Plan on Western Balkans presented in 
December 2022 by the Commission. Accommodation capacity was increased. Steps should be 
undertaken to further align legislation, including the Law on foreigners, with the EU acquis 
and international standards. 
As regards the economic criteria, Kosovo has made some progress and is between an early 
stage and some level of preparation of developing a functioning market economy. Kosovo’s 
economic rebound moderated significantly in 2022. This was mainly due to decreasing 
investment and slowing household consumption growth on the back of high inflation, 
especially after the start of Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine. Despite the resilience 
the economy has demonstrated during the recent crises, the private sector continues to be 
hindered by long-standing structural challenges such as a widespread informal economy, a high 
prevalence of corruption and the overall weak rule of law. High revenue growth due to rising 
prices and increasing numbers of people in formal work, and a significant under-execution of 
 
3 In line with the terminology of European institutions the umbrella term ‘Roma’ is used here to refer to a 
number of different groups, without denying the specificities of these groups. 
 
6 
 
public capital spending led to an almost balanced budget in 2022, while the public debt ratio 
also fell. Inflation surged to double digits due to rising energy, food and transport prices, 
leading to an increase in the current account deficit. The financial sector remained well 
capitalised and stable and bank lending continued to expand.  
Kosovo has made limited progress and is at an early stage in terms of its capacity to cope with 
competitive pressure and market forces in the EU. The education system does not sufficiently 
teach the necessary key skills and is not adequately aligned with labour market needs. Kosovo 
made efforts in improving road infrastructure and increasing investment in renewables, but the 
coal-based, outdated and unreliable energy supply remains a concern. Kosovo made some 
progress on the digitalisation of the economy.  
Limited progress was made during the reporting period in the areas of public procurement and 
financial control. On statistics, there was some progress. 
As regards good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation, Kosovo continued to 
participate in most regional forums. Kosovo maintained overall good relations with Albania, 
Montenegro and North Macedonia. There has been no change in Kosovo’s formal relations 
with Bosnia and Herzegovina, as the country does not recognise Kosovo’s independence. 
Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine have no formal relations with Kosovo, as they do not recognise 
Kosovo’s independence. 
On alignment with European standards, Kosovo made some progress in cluster 2,internal 
market with regards to free movement of goods, freedom to provide services, free movement 
of capitals and intellectual property law. It made limited progress in the area of freedom of 
movement for workers, company law, competition policy, financial services and consumer and 
health protection.  
In cluster 3, competitiveness and inclusive growth, Kosovo made some progress in most 
areas (customs, taxation, social policy and employment, education and culture), except for 
digital transformation and media where progress was limited.  
In policy areas related to cluster 4, the Green Agenda and sustainable connectivity, Kosovo 
made some progress in the energy sector (including by adopting an energy strategy for 2022-
2031). On transport, environment and climate change, it made only limited progress.  
In cluster 5, resources and agriculture, Kosovo made limited progress on agriculture and 
some progress on food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy. On fisheries, it made no 
progress.  
Concerning external relations, limited progress was made during the reporting period. Kosovo 
made progress with implementing the Common Regional Market action plan, notably by 
ratifying the three ‘Berlin process agreements’ on free movement and mutual recognition of 
qualifications. However, the government continues to block decision-making mechanisms 
within CEFTA due to disagreements over Kosovo’s representation. Kosovo has not yet ratified 
the CEFTA additional protocols on trade facilitation and trade in services. Additionally, by 
imposing a ‘temporary operational security measure’ in June 2023 blocking the entry into 
Kosovo of Serbian goods and postal parcels, Kosovo appears not to be in compliance with its 
commitments under CEFTA. The measure also goes against the spirit of the Stabilisation and 
Association Agreement.  
Overall, Kosovo needs to improve its administrative capacity and coordination across all 
sectors to achieve effective implementation of the EU acquis. 
 
7 
 
2.  
THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
2.1. FUNCTIONING OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION REFORM 
2.1.1 Democracy 
The government led by Vetëvendosje continued to hold a solid majority in the Assembly and 
to push ahead with its ambitious EU reform agenda.  
Kosovo’s overall political stability provided the government with an opportunity to implement 
EU-related reforms and to adopt overdue legislation. However, the continued lack of cross-
party cooperation and disagreements within the majority proved a challenge to reforms. Despite 
this, the reporting period witnessed important legislative achievements. The majority agreed 
with the opposition to establish two ad hoc committees in the Assembly, including on electoral 
reform. Some 104 pieces of legislation had been adopted as of June 2023; many of these 
advanced EU integration priorities. 
Opposition parties supported key EU-related laws on some occasions. However, deep 
disagreements between majority and opposition remain. The Assembly often failed to vote on 
legislative proposals due to a lack of decision-making quorum, despite the government holding 
a majority in the Assembly. The Assembly’s committee meetings, presidency sessions and 
plenaries continued to suffer from frequent boycotts and lack of quorum. 
Female participation at all levels of local governance and decision-making in institutions and 
political parties has improved, yet remains low. Kosovo should further implement the Law on 
Gender Equality, which calls for gender parity in public life. 
Elections  
Kosovo made important progress with electoral reform, as it adopted the Law on financing of 
political parties and the Law on general elections. The new legal framework addresses long-
standing recommendations of successive EU Election Observation Missions. A new law on 
the Independent Media Commission still needs to be adopted. The Central Election 
Commission (CEC) needs to implement the new legal framework well in advance of the next 
general election. The CEC needs more financial and human resources to be able to carry on 
the additional tasks deriving from new legal framework.  
Following the withdrawal of Kosovo Serbs from Kosovo institutions in November 2022, local 
by-elections were organised in the four municipalities in the north of Kosovo. Scheduled 
initially for December 2022 and then postponed to 23 April 2023, these mayoral and municipal 
by-elections were held in line with the legal framework of Kosovo and efforts were made for 
them to take place in a smooth and orderly manner. However, due to the very low turnout 
(3.47% of voters), in particular by Kosovo Serb citizens, these elections do not offer a long-
term political solution for these municipalities. Early local elections need to be held as soon as 
possible in all four municipalities, organised in a fully inclusive manner, and with the 
unconditional participation of Kosovo Serbs. 
Kosovo made important progress on addressing long-standing recommendations of successive 
EU Election Observation Missions (EU EOMs). The Assembly’s ad hoc committee on 
electoral reform was established on 1 July 2022 and successfully completed its work on 5 April 
2023. The Committee, chaired by the biggest opposition party (PDK), in cooperation with the 
CEC and other stakeholders, addressed most of the EU EOMs’ recommendations and managed 
to present a consensual Law on general elections. It provides an adequate basis for the conduct 
of democratic elections, in line with international and regional standards. It introduces 
important improvements in several parts of the process, including in relation to suffrage rights,