3 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1.  
CONTEXT  
The EU-Kosovo Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) has been in force since 
April 2016. A second phase of the European Reform Agenda (ERA) was launched in October 
2020, to further guide the implementation of EU-related reforms under the SAA framework. 
The authorities continued to demonstrate publicly their commitment to Kosovo advancing on 
its European path. 
The Commission’s proposal to lift the visa requirements for Kosovo citizens is still pending 
in the Council. The Commission maintains the assessment it made in July 2018 that Kosovo 
has fulfilled all visa liberalisation benchmarks. The European Parliament reconfirmed its 
support for the Commission’s proposal for visa liberalisation.  
The EU-facilitated dialogue on normalisation of relations between Kosovo and Serbia 
continued with meetings at leaders’ and chief negotiators’ level.  
The COVID-19 pandemic continued throughout the reporting period, following similar 
patterns across the region. By end of September 2021, Kosovo had recorded around 159 000 
cases and over 2 900 deaths related to the pandemic. Around 24.6% of the population was 
fully vaccinated. 
The authorities responded by re-introducing public health containment measures, as well as 
by acquiring additional medical equipment to tackle the emergency, as the health system 
came under serious strain. In order to mitigate the severe economic and social impact of the 
crisis, Kosovo adopted two fiscal packages during the reporting period. Kosovo started its 
vaccination campaign at the end of March 2021, when it received its first COVID-19 
vaccines. By early September 2021, Kosovo had reiceved a total of 1.2 million doses, 
including through the COVAX initiative, donations from the EU and other partners, as well 
as via direct procurement.  
1.2. 
SUMMARY OF THE REPORT1  2 
In terms of political criteria, most of the reporting period was marked by political instability 
in Kosovo. Following early parliamentary elections in February 2021, a new government 
took office, with an unprecedentedly strong parliamentary majority.  
During most of the reporting period, legislative activities were limited due to this political 
instability, including EU-related reform efforts. The adoption of a second phase of the 
European Reform Agenda (ERA 2) and its Action Plan, endorsed by the Assembly in 
October 2021, and a solid government focus, confirmed the positive trend of Kosovo’s 
renewed commitment to EU-related reforms.  
After a Constitutional Court decision of December 2020 invalidated the election of the 
previous government in June 2020, the Assembly was dissolved and early elections were held 
                                                          
1 This report covers the period from June 2020 to June 2021. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from the government of Kosovo, the EU Member States, European Parliament reports 
and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. This also includes the results of 
comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular on rule of law. 
2 For the state of play the report uses the following assessment scales: early stage, some level of preparation, 
moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. For progress made during the reporting 
period, the following scale has been used: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, good 
progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, also interim steps have been used. 
 
 
4 
 
in February 2021. Following the landslide victory of an opposition alliance led by the party 
Vetëvendosje, the new Assembly majority approved a new government in March 2021.  
In November 2020, Kosovo’s President in office was indicted and he was arrested on charges 
of war crimes and crimes against humanity by the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office. He 
subsequently resigned from office. The then Assembly Speaker became acting President, in 
line with the Constitution, before being elected by the new legislature to serve a full 
presidential term in April 2021.     
For a large part of the reporting period, the polarised political atmosphere, the lack of an 
effective government majority and the lack of a quorum severely affected decision-making in 
the Assembly. There is a need for the Assembly to improve its regulatory framework, 
including the rules of procedure. The Assembly remained open during the pandemic, while 
maintaining health protection measures. 
Overall, the legislative elections of February 2021 were well-administered, transparent and 
competitive, despite several shortcomings. Kosovo’s electoral process remains in need of 
comprehensive strengthening to address long-standing weaknesses throughout the electoral 
cycle, as identified in successive EU election observation missions since 2014. Strengthening 
the legal and institutional framework on campaign and political party financing remains a 
pending area in need of reform. 
The situation in the north of Kosovo remains challenging, in particular in terms of corruption, 
organised crime, and the conditions for freedom of expression. 
There is some level of preparation in the area of public administration reform, but there 
was no progress on this front during the reporting period, given the frequent government 
changes. The Law on Public Officials entered into force in June but no significant efforts 
were made to start its implementation especially with regard to recruitments. The 
establishment of an effective central recruitment department was delayed. Undue political 
influence over appointments and dismissals of senior public functionaries and civil servants 
has been observed in some instances and Kosovo has met only some of its commitments to 
merit-based criteria. It made no progress in addressing the inequalities in the public sector 
salary system. The process to streamline agencies has stalled. Legal uncertainty for 
businesses and individuals persists due to the continued lack of progress on harmonising 
sectorial legislation with the Law on General Administrative Procedure. A renewed 
commitment to public administration reform is urgent. 
Kosovo is still at an early stage in developing a well-functioning judicial system. The overall 
administration of justice continues to be slow, inefficient and vulnerable to undue political 
influence. Some progress was made during the reporting period. The Functional Review of 
the Rule of Law Sector resulted in a Rule of Law Strategy and Action Plan, which outlines 
the main challenges in the rule of law system and was adopted in August 2021. Kosovo rolled 
out an electronic case-management system and set up a central criminal records system, 
however challenges remain. It has made efforts to implement the Law on mediation. The 
COVID-19 pandemic affected effective case processing and the holding of (and public access 
to) court hearings in Kosovo. The new government has been considering several options for a 
process of ‘vetting’ of the judiciary and prosecution. In this context, the potential introduction 
of a one-off full re-evaluation of all prosecutors and judges is a source of serious concern. 
Such a process should be considered only as an exceptional measure of last resort, once all 
existing tools and mechanisms to ensure integrity and fight corruption of judicial 
officeholders have been exhausted, and should be in line with European and international 
standards as well as with Venice Commission advice.  
 
5 
 
Kosovo is at an early stage/has some level of preparation in the fight against corruption. 
During the reporting period, limited progress was made, including on the investigation and 
prosecution of high-level cases in the track-record. Sustained efforts are needed to achieve 
more proactive investigations, final court decisions and final confiscation of assets. The 
Special Prosecution Office was strengthened as the Corruption and Financial Crime 
Department became operational and it achieved an overall increase in staffing levels. The 
anti-corruption legal package and the revised Criminal Procedure Code still need to be 
adopted. The legal framework on confiscation is in force but is not being consistently applied, 
and the value of finally confiscated assets remains low. Overall, corruption is widespread and 
remains an issue of serious concern. Despite efforts made, there is a need for strong and 
continual political will to effectively address systemic corruption risks, as well as a robust 
criminal justice response to high-level corruption.  
Kosovo is at an early stage in the fight against organised crime. It made limited progress 
during the reporting period on the investigation and prosecution of organised crime cases. 
The Special Prosecution Office was strengthened with additional specialised staff and 
targeted training activities took place. However, the powerful tools envisaged by the Criminal 
Code and the Law on extended powers of confiscation are yet to be fully utilised by police 
and prosecutors. Measures are needed to strengthen the prosecution as well as to ensure that 
there is no political interference in the operational activities of all law enforcement bodies.  
In July 2020, Europol and the Kosovo Police concluded a Working Arrangement. The 
additional agreements necessary to operationalise this cooperation, allowing for access to the 
Secure Information Exchange Network Application (SIENA) and the exchange of Liaison 
Officers, were finalised in September 2021. 
Progress was made in the fight against terrorism, in line with the objectives set out in the 
EU-Kosovo implementing arrangement for the Joint Action Plan on counter-terrorism for the 
Western Balkans, especially with regard to the rehabilitation and reintegration of foreign 
terrorist fighters and their families. The Kosovo authorities need to be more effective in their 
efforts to combat money laundering and the applicable law should be brought in line with EU 
acquis and with international standards.  
The legal framework broadly guarantees the protection of human and fundamental rights in 
line with European standards. However, additional efforts remain needed to fully implement 
it and to improve coordination and oversight of fundamental rights policies and legislation. 
Authorities still depend on donor support and guidance, and need to assume greater 
ownership. More needs to be done to effectively guarantee the rights of persons belonging to 
minorities, including Roma3 and Ashkali and displaced persons, to ensure gender equality in 
practice, and to advance the protection of cultural heritage. As regards freedom of 
expression, Kosovo has some level of preparation and benefits from a pluralistic and lively 
media environment. Concerns remain, however, regarding public smear campaigns, threats 
and physical attacks on journalists. The lack of financial self-sustainability, further 
exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, leaves the media vulnerable to political and 
business interests. The public broadcaster also remains vulnerable to political influence and a 
sustainable solution for its funding still needs to be found.  
The Kosovo authorities continued to make progress in managing both regular migration and 
mixed migration flows in the difficult context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Kosovo further 
                                                          
3 All these groups are considered under the wider ’Roma‘ umbrella term under the EU framework for National 
Roma Integration Strategies 
 
6 
 
increased its accommodation capacity and stepped up preparedness to handle an increased 
influx of migrants.  
As regards the economic criteria, Kosovo has made limited progress and is at an early stage 
of developing a functioning market economy. The economy plunged into recession in 2020, 
but this trend was reversed in the first half of 2021. Long-standing structural problems, such 
as the lack of economic diversification and the dependence on financial flows from the 
diaspora made Kosovo very vulnerable to the pandemic-related lockdown and travel 
restrictions. In response to the crisis, the authorities suspended the fiscal rule and adopted two 
fiscal packages. A strong increase in spending and shrinking tax revenues resulted in a large 
budget deficit in 2020 but recovery in tax revenue helped achieve a budget surplus in the first 
half of 2021. The business environment saw little improvement. Private sector development 
remains constrained by a widespread informal economy, a slow and inefficient judiciary, a 
high prevalence of corruption and the overall weak rule of law. 
Kosovo has made limited progress and is at an early stage in terms of capacity to cope with 
competitive pressure and market forces in the EU. Little progress was made on improving 
the quality of education and addressing skill gaps in the labour market. Kosovo made some 
progress in improving road infrastructure and increasing investment in renewables, but the 
coal-based, outdated and unreliable energy supply remains a concern. Kosovo made some 
progress as regards the digitalisation of the economy. Structural changes are emerging only 
slowly as the economy remains highly reliant on small and very small firms which cannot 
compete internationally, while the export structure remains dominated by a few products, 
such as base metals. 
As regards good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation, Kosovo continued to 
participate in most regional fora. Kosovo maintained overall good relations with Albania, 
Montenegro and North Macedonia. There has been no change in Kosovo’s formal relations 
with Bosnia and Herzegovina, which does not recognise Kosovo’s independence and the two 
maintain a strict visa regime. 
Regarding the normalisation of relations with Serbia, the EU-facilitated dialogue continued 
with high-level meetings on 15 June and 19 July 2021, as well as three chief negotiators’ 
meetings. During the reporting period both parties appointed new chief negotiators and 
negotiating teams. Kosovo needs to engage constructively and make further substantial 
efforts on the implementation of all past agreements and contribute to reaching a 
comprehensive legally binding normalisation agreement with Serbia. Such an agreement is 
urgent and crucial so that Kosovo and Serbia can advance on their respective European paths.  
As regards alignment with European standards, some progress was made during the 
reporting period in the areas of public procurement, statistics and financial control. In most of 
the areas covered by Cluster 2 on internal market, Kosovo has some level of preparation 
namely the free movement of goods, capital, company law and intellectual property, whereas 
it is moderately prepared on movement of workers, services and right of establishment, and 
on financial services. Kosovo is at an early stage of preparation on competition, as well as on 
consumer policy and health protection. In the reporting period, Kosovo made some progress 
in all areas except on consumer policy and health protection, where only limited progress was 
made. In the area of competitiveness and inclusive growth, it made some progress in most 
areas (customs, taxation, information society and media, enterprise and industrial policy), but 
made only limited progress on research and education and culture. It made some progress on 
policy areas related to the Green Agenda and sustainable connectivity, in the energy sector, 
but only limited progress in the areas of transport, environment and climate change. In the 
 
7 
 
field of resources and agriculture, it made only limited progress on agriculture, food safety, 
veterinary and phytosanitary policy. In trade policy, some progress was made in reducing 
Kosovo’s trade deficit, but Kosovo has not yet ratified the CEFTA additional protocols on 
trade facilitation and trade in services. Overall, Kosovo needs to improve its administrative 
capacity and coordination, across all sectors, to achieve effective implementation of the EU 
acquis.  
 
2.  
THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
2.1. 
FUNCTIONING OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 
REFORM 
2.1.1 Democracy 
The reporting period was marked by political instability and by early parliamentary elections, 
the third one in less than four years. In this context, most legislative activities, including EU-
related reform efforts, were constrained. 
In December 2020, the Constitutional Court invalidated the June 2020 election of the 
government of Prime Minister Hoti, and requested the dissolution of the Assembly and the 
holding of early elections, which subsequently took place on 14 February 2021. The elections 
were overall well-administered, despite shortcomings, and delivered a landslide victory to the 
opposition Vetëvendosje party. The new Assembly majority approved a new government led 
by Albin Kurti in March 2021.  
Kosovo’s President in office, Hashim Thaçi, was indicted and arrested on war crimes charges 
by the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office and resigned from office in November 2020. Then 
Assembly Speaker Vjosa Osmani became acting President, in line with the Constitution. 
Osmani was ultimately elected to a full presidential term by the new legislature in April 2021. 
Several opposition parties (PDK, AAK and Srpska Lista) boycotted the presidential election 
procedure in the Assembly. 
Elections 
The early legislative elections held in February 2021 were overall well-administered, 
transparent and competitive. However, significant vulnerabilities, in particular with regard to 
vote-counting, the process of out-of-Kosovo voting and handling of complaints were evident. 
In Kosovo Serb areas, the campaign was more subdued, with almost no visible campaign 
activities by parties other than the dominant Kosovo Serb political party, Srpska Lista. 
Kosovo’s electoral process remains in need of comprehensive strengthening, effectively 
addressing long-standing weaknesses throughout the electoral cycle, as identified in 
successive EU election observation missions since 2014. The strengthening of the legal and 
institutional framework on campaign and political party financing remains outstanding. 
Following a ruling by the Constitutional Court in December 2020, which declared the 
Assembly’s election of the government led by Prime Minister Avdullah Hoti as 
unconstitutional, early general elections were held in Kosovo on 14 February 2021.  
The election delivered a landslide victory to the opposition Vetëvendosje party, which 
received 50.3% of votes cast, winning 58 seats in the Assembly. The Democratic Party of 
Kosovo won 19 seats (17.0%), while the former governing parties, the Democratic League of 
Kosovo (12.7%) and the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (7.1%) won 15 and 8 seats 
respectively. Srpska Lista won all 10 seats reserved for the Kosovo Serb community with 
5.1% of the total votes. The remaining 10 seats in Kosovo’s 120 seat Assembly are shared