1.1. CONTEXT 
The EU-Kosovo Stabilisation and Association Agreement has been in force since April 2016. 
Kosovo submitted an application for EU membership in December 2022. Holders of Kosovo 
passports enjoy visa-free travel to the EU since 1 January 2024. The authorities remain 
committed to Kosovo’s European path, accompanied by high public support. Over the last 
few months though, due to the political stalemate, the pace of Kosovo’s preparations has 
slowed down. 
The reporting period was impacted by divisive domestic politics and a confrontational 
campaign ahead of the general elections on 9 February 2025, followed by a post-election 
political gridlock due to political parties’ inability and lack of political will to find a way 
towards the formation of institutions. The government has been in caretaker status since 23 
March 2025, with only limited executive functions to carry out day-to-day operations.  
In the reporting period, the EU-facilitated Dialogue on normalisation of relations 
between Kosovo and Serbia continued. Domestic political preoccupations on both sides 
have hindered decisive steps towards implementing the 2023 Agreement on the Path to 
Normalisation and its implementation annex and thereby progressing on normalising their 
relations. Constructive engagement in the normalisation is also a requirement under the 
Reform and Growth Facility for the Western Balkans. From May 2025 the EU has taken some 
steps to gradually lift the measures in force since 2023 vis à vis Kosovo, conditional upon 
sustained de-escalation in the north.  
Kosovo has started to implement the new Growth Plan for the Western Balkans. Under the 
Reform and Growth Facility for the Western Balkans (a performance-based EU instrument 
supporting the EU integration process), Kosovo adopted its Reform Agenda on 9 October 
2024. This covers reforms in the areas of: (i) governance, public administration reform and 
public financial management; (ii) green and digital transition; (iii) human capital; (iv) private 
sector development and business environment; and (v) fundamental rights and the rule of 
law. However, the ratification of the Facility Agreement and signature and ratification of the 
Loan Agreement remain pending, due to the political gridlock, and the implementation of the 
agreed steps in Kosovo’s Reform Agenda has so far been limited. 
Kosovo has maintained its voluntary alignment with the EU CFSP and implementation of EU 
restrictive measures, signalling its clear commitment to EU values. The EU has repeatedly 
welcomed, in particular, Kosovo's continued condemnation of Russia's unjustified and 
unprovoked military aggression against Ukraine and its enforcement of restrictive measures 
against Russia and Belarus.

* * *

1.2 MAIN FINDINGS OF THE REPORT 
THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
Democracy  
 
1 This report covers the period from 1 September 2024 to 1 September 2025. It is based on input from a variety 
of sources, including contributions from the government of Kosovo, EU Member States, European Parliament 
reports and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also includes the 
results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular on the rule of law.  
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of 
preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made 
during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, 
good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been used. 
 
4 
 
The framework for elections is generally free and fair. On 9 February 2025, Kosovo held the 
first parliamentary elections under the newly revised framework, which had been aligned 
with the EU Election Observation Mission’s (EU EOM) recommendations in 2023. Although 
final voter turnout was moderate, at 46.6 per cent, the elections, observed by an EU EOM, 
were peaceful, competitive and inclusive.  
The EU EOM noted smooth conduct of the voting on the election day. There were attempts 
to politicise the work of the Central Election Commission (CEC), though the Elections 
Complaints and Appeals Panel (ECAP) effectively handled complaints. While the campaign 
period was competitive, there were instances of harsh rhetoric, misuse of public resources, 
and socio-political pressure in Kosovo Serb majority areas.  
The Independent Media Commission (IMC) struggled to enforce its regulatory oversight due 
to persisting governance issues. Another worrying issue was the inadequate response to 
electoral disinformation and foreign interference.  
The Assembly can exercise its powers, including control of the executive and involvement in 
the legislative process, albeit with shortcomings. The previous legislature was marked by a 
lack of political consensus, procedural violations, boycotts, regular calls for extraordinary 
sessions and rushed legislative procedures. Despite isolated improvements, such as the 
introduction of electronic voting and publication of individual MPs’ votes, the overall 
parliamentary performance suffered.  
The Assembly still needs to improve its internal management system and adopt work plans. 
With the start of the election campaign in January 2025, the Assembly entered a period of 
inactivity. Following the parliamentary elections, the Assembly’s failure to constitute itself 
has been seriously undermining the functioning of key democratic institutions. 
As regards governance, challenges in the relationship between municipalities and central 
institutions persist. On 5 December 2024, the government adopted a significant number of 
laws under expedited procedures, raising concerns over democratic principles. The 
opposition, critical of this practice, challenged a number of laws in the Constitutional Court.  
The institutions in charge of the EU integration process are mostly in place. While Kosovo 
publicly reaffirms its commitment to the EU agenda, divisive domestic politics and lack of 
prioritisation hampered its effective implementation.  
Civil society organisations (CSO) operate in an overall enabling environment. They are active 
and diverse, participating in the design and monitoring of the EU-related reforms. However, 
they have trouble meaningfully contributing to the policymaking processes, as the 
consultation processes organised by the government are mostly a formal exercise. The new 
Strategy for cooperation with civil society should be approved. The phasing out of US 
development assistance laid bare the level of CSO’s dependency on international donors’ 
funding.  
Public administration reform  
Kosovo has some level of preparation and made limited progress, adopting a new 
Programme for rationalising independent agencies in September 2024. While Kosovo 
advanced on administrative burden reduction, service delivery and digitalisation, there are 
considerable delays to implementing the legal framework. Kosovo should fully address the 
EU recommendations regarding the Law on public officials and the ruling by the 
Constitutional Court on the Law on salaries in the public sector.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
 
5 
 
→ increase the civil service’s capacities through: i) merit-based recruitments, performance 
assessment and measures towards gender equality; ii) decrease the number of vacant 
and acting positions; iii) finalise the process of job classification and systematisation; 
and iv) ensure functioning of the new remuneration system;   
→ accelerate the process of rationalisation of independent agencies and increase number 
of e-services, to further reduce administrative burden;  
→ adopt the Law on PFM and ensure that fiscal risk assessment provisions and the public 
investment methodology are part of the revised legislation. 
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights 
Kosovo is between an early stage of preparation and having some level of preparation to 
apply the EU acquis and European standards on the judiciary and fundamental rights, and 
made limited progress. 
Functioning of the judiciary  
Kosovo is between an early stage of preparation and having some level of preparation, and 
made limited progress on the functioning of the judiciary, including through reducing the 
backlog of cases and introducing several digitalisation measures. The government 
consulted the Venice Commission (VC) on the package of draft laws on the judiciary, taking 
steps towards aligning its legislation with European standards and VC recommendations. 
The Kosovo Judicial Council (KJC) and Kosovo Prosecutorial Council (KPC) continue to 
operate with incomplete membership. Due to the current political gridlock, the delays in 
designing the justice reforms have negatively affected the efforts to strengthen the 
mechanisms on accountability and efficiency within the judiciary and prosecution. Undue 
influence from internal and different external sources remains. The amendments to the Law 
on the KPC entered into force in June 2025, introducing some improvements, but the 
recommendations of the Venice Commission will need to be fully reflected in future 
amendments.   
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented, and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo needs, in particular, to: 
→ ensure prompt adoption of legislation deriving from the Joint Statement of Commitment, 
including the necessary implementing legislation, in line with VC’s recommendations; 
enhance the use of existing mechanisms on integrity, accountability and efficiency 
within the judiciary and prosecution, with a focus on the implementation and monitoring 
responsibilities of the KJC and KPC;  
→ establish a well-defined responsibility framework for all management functions in the 
Councils, Courts and Prosecution Offices including transparent monitoring and 
accountability mechanisms as well as corrective measures for poor performance;  
→ enhance the accountability and efficiency of judges and prosecutors in handling high 
level corruption cases, organised crime cases, other high-profile cases, and gender-
based violence cases; and ensure consistent enforcement of procedural discipline and 
stronger case management practices. 
Fight against corruption 
Kosovo is between an early stage of preparation and having some level of preparation in 
fighting corruption and made limited progress. Kosovo made further progress in 
adjudicating high-level corruption cases, which resulted in a higher number of final court 
decisions and convictions, while the overall number of investigations and final convictions in 
non-high-level corruption cases decreased. Kosovo still has no strategic framework in place 
 
6 
 
in the area of fight against corruption. Despite the pronounced political commitment to 
enhance anti-corruption measures, there is no coherent approach to it. To effectively fight 
corruption at all levels, Kosovo needs to make better use of existing anti-corruption 
legislation, including the Law on extended powers of confiscation. Preventative tools such 
as asset declarations and public institutions’ integrity plans should be more effectively used 
to identify and pre-emptively fight corruption at its roots. Kosovo continued to undertake risk 
assessments in vulnerable sectors. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented, and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should:   
→ further strengthen the capacity of the Agency for the Prevention of Corruption (APC), in 
terms of staff and expertise, to ensure it can carry out its mandate effectively;   
→ implement existing anti-corruption legislation and adopt a national strategy and action 
plan against corruption for 2025-2028, in line with European best practices and 
standards;  
→ continue to strengthen the quality of investigation in high-level corruption cases; 
increase the capacity of the Special Investigative Unit of the police and ensure it 
cooperates effectively with the Special Prosecution Office (SPO).  
Fundamental rights  
Overall, the legal and institutional framework for the promotion, protection and enforcement 
of human rights is in place, but implementation needs more effort. Kosovo appointed the 
head of the Agency for Gender Equality. There was further progress on the verification 
process of diplomas from the University in North Mitrovica, as the mandate of the 
Commission for the verification of diplomas was extended for another six months. 
Implementation of legislation safeguarding the rights of persons belonging to non-majority 
communities, including language rights, needs strengthening. Several new measures 
adopted by the government further undermined the access to basic services for these 
communities. Adoption of the Civil Code and amendments to the Law on freedom of religion 
remain pending. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should: 
→ ensure better protection of the rights of persons with disabilities and their access to their 
rights; adopt the Law on status recognition, services and beneﬁts; 
→ strengthen implementation of the Law on gender equality and the strategy on gender-
based violence; enhance gender mainstreaming of legislation, regulations and policies; 
adopt the programme for gender equality and the national action plan for Women, Peace 
and Security; 
→ enhance implementation of existing mechanisms protecting the rights of non-majority 
communities and religious communities. 
Freedom of expression  
Kosovo has some level of preparation and made no progress. The Constitutional Court 
annulled the Law on the Independent Media Commission (IMC), providing the authorities 
with clear guidance to ensure the prompt drafting of a new law. While the media landscape 
is pluralistic, it faces challenges related to transparency in media ownership and financial 
sustainability. The environment in northern Kosovo remains restrictive, fostering self-
censorship among the public, media and civil society.  
 
7 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should: 
→ improve the capacity of the prosecutorial, judicial and law-enforcement authorities to 
handle cases related to violence and threats against journalists and other media 
workers; 
→ develop protocols and training on the protection and safety of journalists, including early-
warning and rapid-response mechanisms; improve the working conditions of journalists 
and media workers and strengthen professional reporting; 
→ adopt and implement a new Law on the Independent Media Commission, fully aligned 
with the EU acquis and European standards; review the Law on the Radio Television of 
Kosovo (RTK) to ensure sustainable funding, preserving the public broadcaster’s 
independence; appoint the IMC Board Members, the RTK Board Members and the RTK 
General Director without delays. 
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security  
Kosovo has some level of preparation in the field of justice, freedom and security and made 
limited progress, notably through adopting the new Serious and Organised Crime 
Assessment (SOCTA), the entry into force of the Regulation on establishment and 
functioning of the Joint Investigation Team and formally establishing the early warning 
system. The Law on anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism, 
adopted by the Assembly, is under Constitutional Court’s review on procedural grounds. 
Efforts to recruit Kosovo Serb and other non-majority communities’ cadets to address the 
resignation gap in Mitrovica North Regional Police Directorate had tangible results. In the 
field of migration, the revised contingency plan to manage migration flows is pending 
government approval.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular:  
→ increase the number of final convictions for money laundering; set up a national centre 
for countering terrorism and violent extremism; 
→ continue to implement the EU Action Plan on Western Balkans for migration; amend the 
Law on foreigners in line with EU standards and develop a new comprehensive and 
cross-sectoral strategy on migration; 
→ progressively align its visa policy with the EU list of visa-required third countries; 
continue to address the issue of unfounded asylum applications by Kosovo citizens by 
improving screenings at departures, continuing to engage with the most affected EU 
Member States and rolling out the information campaign on rights and obligations 
associated with visa-free travel in the EU. 
Fight against serious and organised crime 
Kosovo is between an early stage of preparation and having some level of preparation in 
the fight against organised crime and made some progress in this area, notably by 
launching the Joint Money Laundering Intelligence Network Kosovo (JMLINK) and adopting 
a new Serious and Organised Crime Assessment (SOCTA). Information exchanged via the 
Secure Information Exchange Network Application (SIENA) increased significantly.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular:  
→ adopt the national strategy against organised crime and its action plan, in line with EU 
standards; further improve the investigation and prosecution of high-profile organised 
 
8 
 
crime; proactively target and map organised criminal groups and networks;  
→ strengthen the efficiency of the criminal confiscation regime; to that end, establish a 
confiscation fund and increase use of confiscation tools by the prosecution and police; 
→ strengthen mechanisms for reintegrating victims of trafficking in human beings. 
 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND COMPETITIVENESS 
The existence of a functioning market economy 
Kosovo has some level of preparation and made some progress in developing a functioning 
market economy. Economic growth picked up on the back of stronger private consumption 
and a surge in public investment. Despite a strong increase in public spending, the 2024 
budget remained close to balance, due to robust revenue performance. Fiscal challenges 
persist given the narrow tax base, weaknesses in public investment management, 
insufficient targeting of social benefits and poor financial oversight of publicly-owned 
enterprises (POEs). Despite employment gains, the labour market continues to face 
challenges, such as low participation and high unemployment rates as well as a significant 
gender gap. The banking sector continues to be sound and resilient. Some progress was 
made in reducing the size of the informal sector and improving the business environment, 
notably through a speedier settlement of commercial disputes.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. To improve the functioning of the market economy, Kosovo should, in 
particular:  
→ strengthen the revenue base by reducing loopholes and exemptions, including by 
amending tax legislation;  
→ improve the quality of public spending by addressing remaining weaknesses in public 
investment management and better targeting social benefits; 
→ reduce fiscal risks by improving financial oversight and accountability of POEs. 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces in the EU 
Kosovo is between an early stage and some level of preparation and made some progress 
in terms of its capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces in the EU. The 
education system does not adequately equip students with the skills demanded by the 
labour market.  Limited progress was made in improving transport infrastructure while some 
progress was made in promoting renewable energy sources and digitalising the economy. 
The economy remains highly reliant on small and micro firms, which cannot compete 
internationally. Trade openness increased significantly compared with 2019.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. To improve 
competitiveness and sustain long-term growth, Kosovo should, in particular:  
→ align education with labour market needs, including by revising the legal framework on 
vocational education and training (VET) and adult education; 
→ develop transparent and competitive procedures for deploying renewable energy; 
→ facilitate private-sector investment and improve mechanisms to attract FDI in strategic 
sectors, promoting the adoption of higher value-added products and services and 
innovation. 
Chapter 5 – Public procurement 
 
9 
 
Kosovo is between having some and a moderate level of preparation and made limited 
progress in this area. Kosovo advanced with the use of best price-quality ratio criterion, 
reduced the use of negotiated procedures without prior publication of a contract notice and 
started interconnecting its e-procurement platform with other government IT systems.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and remain largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ adopt a new law on public procurement and a new law on public-private 
partnerships/concessions in line with the EU acquis and Reform Agenda commitments; 
develop respective implementing legislation and secure its proper application;  
→ ensure that the Procurement Review Body (PRB) is fully operational and functionally 
independent, with a strengthened capacity to ensure its review process is timely, 
effective and transparent; 
→ upgrade the e-procurement platform in line with the new Law on public procurement and 
improve its efficiency. 
Chapter 18 – Statistics 
Kosovo has some level of preparation in this area. Limited progress was made in producing 
new statistical products and more frequent transmission of data to Eurostat. The final 
results of Kosovo’s population and housing census were published in December 2024.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular: 
→ ensure increased access to and use of available administrative data sources; strengthen 
coordination of the statistical system among key statistical institutions, in particular the 
Ministry of Finance;  
→ increase capacities to report on government financial statistics according to the ESA 
2010; 
→ fill vacant positions in the Kosovo Agency of Statistics (KAS) to strengthen its capacities, 
with a particular emphasis on an increased use of information technology. 
Chapter 32 – Financial control 
Kosovo has some level of preparation and made limited progress in implementing the 
strategic priorities.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular: 
→ adopt the new legislation concerning public financial management, external audit and 
protecting the EU financial interests and the euro, and ensure it is implemented, 
including by strengthening the administrative capacity across the PFM system; 
→ strengthen the managerial accountability of budget users at both central and local levels, 
on the grounds of robust evaluation of the performance of the management and control 
systems; 
→ improve the implementation of the NAO recommendations and enhance the 
transparency of the external audit. 
 
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET 
 
10 
 
Chapter 1 – Free movement of goods 
Kosovo is between having some and a moderate level of preparation in this area and made 
no progress.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and remain valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular:  
→ adopt the Law on inspection and product conformity to fully align with the EU acquis on 
market surveillance and on mutual recognition, and increase the enforcement capacity of 
the conformity assessment and market surveillance bodies;   
→ start the implementation of the new Law on Central Inspectorate of Market Surveillance; 
→ ensure full alignment with more of the EU ‘new and global approach, ‘old approach’ and 
procedural measures. 
Chapter 2 – Freedom of movement for workers 
Kosovo has some level of preparation and made some progress in the freedom of 
movement for workers. One bilateral agreement on social security was signed with Croatia. 
The negotiations with Austria and Türkiye are concluded, and the agreements are awaiting 
signature by the government and ratification by the Assembly.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular: 
→ continue to work on concluding additional agreements on social security coordination, in 
particular with EU Member States, and develop IT infrastructures for the European Health 
Insurance Card (EHIC) and Electronic Exchange of Social Security Information (EESSI) 
purposes, as well as administrative capacities in view of joining the future EESSI 
Network; 
→ start work to prepare for joining the European Network of Employment Services (EURES); 
→ start to work on legislation to preserve the supplementary pension rights of people who 
have worked abroad, including in EU Member States. 
Chapter 3 – Right of establishment and freedom to provide services 
Kosovo is moderately prepared and made limited progress, notably as regards professional 
qualifications. However, sectoral laws are still not compliant with the EU Services Directive 
and Kosovo’s point of single contact (PSC) is not fully functional.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented, and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ closely monitor the implementation of the latest action plan to render sectoral legislation 
compliant with the EU Services Directive, and launch a functional and informative PSC;  
→ align with the Regulation on cross-border parcel delivery service and strengthen 
institutional capacity to monitor and ensure compliance with the new rules in the postal 
market; 
→ align the legal framework with the EU acquis on mutual recognition of professional 
qualifications, including the Directive on recognition of professional qualifications and 
the Directive on a proportionality test. 
Chapter 4 – Free movement of capital 
 
11 
 
Kosovo is moderately prepared and made some progress, with the entry into force of a new 
Law on the register of beneficial owners. The adopted Law on payment services and the 
adopted Law on the prevention of money laundering and terrorist financing,  are pending a 
review by the Constitutional Court on procedural grounds. The exchange of information and 
supervisory capacities in the fight against money laundering and terrorism financing have 
improved.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and in the 
coming year, Kosovo should, in particular:  
→ further align with the EU Payment Services Directive 2 and the Electronic Money Directive 
2 and continue the gradual liberalisation of capital movements including on foreign 
exchange operations;  
→ align the Law on the prevention of money laundering and terrorist financing with the EU 
acquis and take additional measures to ensure the effective implementation of the 
legislation in this area, including adopting necessary bylaws and standard operating 
procedures; 
→ continue to strengthen inter-institutional cooperation and step up action in the fight 
against money laundering and terrorist financing and build a track record on increased 
monitoring, supervision, financial intelligence, investigation and reporting in the fight 
against economic and financial crime. 
Chapter 6 – Company law 
Kosovo has some level of preparation, and made limited progress in further aligning its 
legal framework with the EU acquis in the area of company law.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented, and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular:  
→ adopt the draft Law on business organisations, to further align its legal framework with 
the EU acquis on company law; 
→ further align with the most recent acquis on the use of digital tools and processes in 
company law and cross-border conversions, mergers and divisions;  
→ further align its legal framework with the EU acquis on company reporting, country-by-
country reporting , and transparency, as well as strengthen both the institutional audit 
oversight structures and the professional independence/objectivity of auditors and audit 
firms; and ensure that these structures are sufficiently and sustainably funded. 
Chapter 7 – Intellectual property law 
Kosovo is moderately prepared in the area of intellectual property rights (IPR). Limited 
progress was achieved by approving the 2025-27 Industrial Property Programme and 
efficient handling of cases and disputes of by the Commercial Court in this field. However, 
Kosovo needs to significantly strengthen its institutional capacities and resources to 
effectively implement and enforce the legal framework on intellectual property rights. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and remain largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular: 
→ improve the implementation of the adopted legislation, with a focus on strategic 
planning and capacity-building; 
 
12 
 
→ adopt implementing legislation for industrial property laws, including on topographies of 
semiconductor products and trade secrets, and ensure effective implementation of the 
Law on copyright and related rights; 
→ enhance collaboration with the European Union Intellectual Property Office (EUIPO), 
leveraging its expertise, networks and specialised databases. 
Chapter 8 – Competition policy 
Kosovo has some level of preparation and made limited progress in this area, notably 
through slightly improving the enforcement of competition legislation, but it did not progress 
in the area of State aid.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and remain largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular:  
→ establish a functional State Aid Commission, in line with the SAA and Reform Agenda 
obligations; 
→ further align the legislative framework in the area of State aid with the EU acquis, and 
ensure competition and State aid legislation is enforced; 
→ guarantee the operational independence and functional capacity of competition and 
State aid authorities; increase coordination between all stakeholders, including 
ministries, regulators and the judiciary. 
Chapter 9 – Financial services 
Kosovo is moderately prepared and made limited progress, notably by amending the Law on 
banks, aiming to further align its legal framework with the acquis on capital requirements 
and on bank recovery and resolution.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented, and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ align its legal framework with the Solvency II Directive; and ensure the relevant 
legislation is implemented; 
→ continue efforts to align with the EU acquis related to the regulation of securities 
markets, investment funds, investment services, financial markets infrastructure and 
digital finance; 
→ further align its legal framework with the Deposit Guarantee Scheme Directive and the 
EU acquis on bank recovery and resolution, and establish a resolution fund.  
Chapter 28 – Consumer and health protection 
Kosovo is at an early stage of preparation in this area and made limited progress, notably 
by adopting the 2025-2030 Health Sector Strategy, several relevant by-laws, instructions and 
clinical protocols. However, the implementation of health sector reforms remains slow.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and remain largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ adopt the Law on consumer protection and start aligning with the new EU product safety 
acquis; 
→ ensure a more efficient implementation of the initiated reforms in the health sector; 
introduce appropriate health financing reforms to ensure progress towards universal 
health coverage and improve the efficiency and quality of health services. 
 
13 
 
 
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH 
Chapter 10: Digital transformation and media 
Kosovo has some level of preparation in the area of digital transformation and media. 
Kosovo made some progress, notably by adopting the implementing legislation stemming 
from the Law on cybersecurity, expanding and online services through the e-Kosova 
platform, and advancing the deployment of the 5G network, which now covers 75% of the 
territory. Further alignment with the EU acquis, a limited number of online services, outdated 
and fragmented platforms, and cybersecurity risks remain a challenge.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ align its legislation with the European Electronic Communications Code and the EU 
Network and Information Security Directive (NIS2);  
→ ensure that telecommunication and media regulators are given appropriate resources to 
fulfil their mandates independently; and develop a solution to ensure that the public 
service broadcaster is sustainably funded; 
→ implement number portability to ensure effective use of numbering resources and 
encourage competition. 
Chapter 16 - Taxation 
Kosovo has some level of preparation in this area, with some progress made, notably 
through implementing risk-based audits, enforcement and digitalisation, as well as 
improving compliance audits and with regard to formalisation measures. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented, and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ initiate a tax policy revision and broaden the tax base, including further legal alignment 
with the EU acquis; 
→ prioritise the use of domestic and international third-party data to address international 
tax avoidance and evasion; 
→ strengthen the administrative and professional capacity of the Tax Administration of 
Kosovo (TAK) by setting out clear rules on jobs, recruitment, performance evaluation, 
merit-based promotion and transfers. 
Chapter 17 – Economic and monetary policy 
Kosovo is moderately prepared and some progress was made in this area, notably as the 
Central Bank of Kosovo (CBK) continued improving its governance. While Kosovo advanced 
with collecting and transmitting data to Eurostat, methodological inconsistencies persist in 
some areas.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ increase its capacity to report on government financial statistics according to the ESA 
2010; and ensure regular monitoring of standards; 
→ improve the quality of macroeconomic forecasting in the budgetary process; 
→ align Kosovo’s budget framework with the EU acquis. 
 
14 
 
Chapter 19 – Social policy and employment 
Kosovo has some level of preparation in this area. There was good progress, in particular 
with the increased pace of reforms implemented by the Labour Inspectorate, the 
continuation of the piloting of a reform of the social assistance scheme and the efforts to 
implement the Youth Guarantee scheme. The rate of fatal occupational accidents continued 
to decline, whereas the reporting of non-fatal accidents increased. Kosovo needs to 
continue aligning with the EU acquis on non-discrimination and equality, including gender 
equality.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a large extent and 
in the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ adopt pending legislation, namely amendments to the Law on labour, a new law on 
employment and a new law on health and safety at work, making sure to align the legal 
framework with the EU acquis, notably in relation to equality and non-discrimination in 
employment as well as parental leave; 
→ continue the reform of social assistance scheme and increase the funding and quality of 
service delivery at the municipal level; 
→ continue the preparations for a full roll-out of the Youth Guarantee scheme.  
Chapter 20 – Enterprise and industrial policy 
Kosovo is moderately prepared and made limited progress by continuing to implement the 
2030 strategy for industrial development and business support.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and remain largely valid. In the coming period, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ move forward with the implementation of the strategy for industrial development and 
business support for 2030, and the sustainable economic growth pillar of the national 
development strategy for 2021-2030; 
→ urgently improve capacity at the Ministry of Industry, Entrepreneurship and Trade; 
→ complete the establishment of the two separate investment promotion and SME support 
agencies, and ensure that both are sufficiently resourced. 
Chapter 25 – Science and research 
Kosovo is at an early stage of preparation. It made limited progress, taking further steps 
towards a strategic approach to research and innovation. Funding of innovation support 
measures has started. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and remain largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ intensify efforts to establish a positive trend in its Horizon Europe participation and 
make progress in developing a smart specialisation strategy; 
→ adopt the law on innovation and entrepreneurship and create a system to reliably provide 
research, science and technology and innovation statistics, so it can join the European 
Innovation Scoreboard; 
→ ensure a structural increase in public funding for the research sector, with clear and 
accessible data available to the public.  
Chapter 26 – Education and culture 
 
15 
 
Kosovo has some level of preparation in the field of education and culture. There was some 
progress, mainly with the adoption of by-laws for the Law on early childhood education and 
with growing budget allocations for early childhood education, including for related 
infrastructure. However, the quality of education needs improvement, especially pre-
university education. Children from vulnerable groups continue to be marginalised, in 
particular children from the Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian communities. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and in the 
coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ continue to implement the roadmap outlined in its education strategy for 2022-2026, 
assess the progress and update/revise the strategy for post-2026;  
→ strengthen vocational education and training (VET) governance, institutionalise quality 
assessment of teachers and schools and improve digital skills; 
→ systematically apply quality assurance mechanisms at all education levels, especially for 
basic/pre-university education. 
Chapter 29 – Customs union 
Kosovo is moderately prepared and made some progress, notably by expanding the use of 
publicly operated customs terminals, reducing customs terminal fees, increasing revenue 
collection, fighting customs fraud and strengthening the capacities of Kosovo Customs. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ finalise and approve the implementing legislation for the new Customs and Excise Code, 
in line with the EU requirements; 
→ continue to strengthen the administrative and professional capacities of Kosovo 
Customs by implementing the Customs and Excise Code rules, particularly related to 
jobs, performance evaluation, merit-based promotion and transfers and by combating 
customs fraud, in particular smuggling of tobacco products, by cooperating with the European 
Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF); continue the development of the digital customs systems and 
adopt an IT strategy and action plan. 
→ facilitate trade agreements, including by abolishing all remaining fees charged to 
exporters/importers at public, publicly operated and private inland customs terminals. 
 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY 
Chapter 14 – Transport policy 
Kosovo has some level of preparation the area and made some progress by adopting the Law 
on roads and the intelligent transport system (ITS) action plan. More action is needed to 
implement the EU acquis.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented, and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ invest in road maintenance and inspections; continue road safety campaigns; and set 
up an effective monitoring mechanism for collecting crash data;  
→ align its legal framework with the EU rail acquis, particularly the 4th railway package for 
both the market and technical pillar;  
 
16 
 
→ ensure sufficient capacity and resources to implement the intelligent transport system 
strategy; and align the legislative framework with the EU passenger rights acquis across 
all modes of transport. 
Chapter 15 - Energy 
Kosovo has some level of preparation in the area of energy and made some progress, 
notably by launching 100 MW wind auction, investing in energy efficiency upgrades for 
public and residential buildings and making a step towards liberalisation of electricity 
market. However, Kosovo remains heavily reliant on outdated coal-fired power plants and 
needs to accelerate the deployment of renewable energy sources and investment in energy 
efficiency.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented, and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ adopt its National Energy and Climate Plan (NECP) and the package of energy laws to 
ensure alignment with the Electricity Integration Package and Clean Energy Package; and 
organise the next round of renewables auctions; 
→ speed up the environmental upgrade of the Kosovo B thermal power plant and the works 
for decommissioning the non-working parts of the Kosovo A thermal power plant; 
→ improve the implementation of energy efficiency legislation, including on energy 
performance of buildings, and continue energy efficiency investment. 
Chapter 21 – Trans-European Networks 
Kosovo has some level of preparation in the area. Limited progress was made by continuing 
works on Rail Route 10 and by initiating the intra-day electricity market coupling with 
Albania.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and remain largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ strengthen its institutional and administrative capacity to implement strategic 
infrastructure projects; 
→ continue implementing pending transport and energy connectivity projects; 
→ proceed with the signalling works; complete the first phase of Rail Route 10 from Fushë 
Kosovë/Kosovo Polje to the border with North Macedonia. 
Chapter 27 – Environment and climate change 
Kosovo is at an early stage of preparation in this area and made limited progress. The 
Ministry of Environment, Spatial Planning and Infrastructure (MESPI) took some steps to 
improve its administrative capacity, but final restructuration of MESPI is pending. The 
integrated waste management strategy, including 2024-2026 action plan and recycling 
targets, was approved in December 2024.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular:  
→ ensure that appropriate measures are taken to manage protected areas and stop them 
becoming contaminated;  
→ amend the Law on waste management;  
→ implement the Law on climate change and align with and implement the Monitoring 
Reporting Verification and Accreditation (MRVA acquis. 
 
17 
 
 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION 
Chapter 11 - Agriculture 
Kosovo has some level of preparation and made limited progress in agriculture and rural 
development. The national programme for agriculture and rural development for 2023-2027 
is being implemented. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and remain largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ strengthen the administrative and technical capacity of both the Department of Rural 
Development Policy (managing authority) and the Agency for Agricultural Development 
(paying agency); 
→ adopt the law on agriculture and rural development advisory services and the 
implementing legislation on the market organisation for agricultural products; 
→ amend or repeal the Law on agricultural land and take urgent and effective measures to 
stop the loss of agricultural land. 
Chapter 12 – Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy 
Kosovo is moderately prepared in the area of food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary 
policies. Some progress was made. Kosovo has ensured full funding for the oral rabies 
vaccination campaigns for 2025 and 2026 and has completed the selection of the operator 
for the Category 1 animal by-product processing plant. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ strengthen the administrative capacity of the implementing bodies by increasing the 
number and expertise of the staff; 
→ adopt the draft law on animal health; approve the 5-year development plan for disease 
monitoring and control; and ensure appropriate financial and human resources for their 
implementation; 
→ start work on the harmonisation and adoption of legislation in the area of phytosanitary 
policy, in line with the EU acquis, and prepare a national plan to upgrade food, feed and 
animal by-product establishments to EU standards. 
Chapter 13 – Fisheries and aquaculture 
Kosovo remains at an early stage of preparation in this chapter and made no progress.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented, and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ adopt a multiannual strategy for aquaculture, and strengthen the administrative capacity 
of the implementing bodies, by increasing the number and expertise of the staff; 
→ draft a law on fisheries and aquaculture and further align its market policy with the 
acquis; 
→ create an inventory of fish species covering the entire territory of Kosovo. 
Chapter 22 – Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments