1.1 CONTEXT 
The EU-Kosovo Stabilisation and Association Agreement has been in force since April 2016. 
Kosovo submitted an application for EU membership in December 2022. The authorities remain 
committed to Kosovo’s European path.  
In the reporting period, the EU-facilitated Dialogue on normalisation of relations between 
Kosovo and Serbia continued. Both Parties committed to fully implement all of their respective 
obligations stemming from the Agreement on the Path to Normalisation and its Implementation 
Annex reached in 2023. Constructive engagement in the normalisation of their relations is also 
a requirement under the Reform and Growth Facility for the Western Balkans. In line with the 
3 June 2023 statement by the High Representative on behalf of the EU, the EU has been 
implementing 
reversible 
measures 
vis-à-vis 
Kosovo. 
The 
High 
Representative 
has 
recommended the lifting of those measures. 
Since 1 January 2024, holders of Kosovo passports enjoy visa-free travel to the EU.  
Kosovo has actively engaged in implementing the new Growth Plan for the Western Balkans 
across the four pillars of: (i) gradual integration with the European Union’s single market: (ii) 
regional economic integration; (iii) fundamental reforms; and (iv) enhanced financial support. 
On 9 October, Kosovo adopted its Reform Agenda as envisaged under the Reform and Growth 
Facility2 (Growth Plan for Western Balkans). The Reform Agenda covers reform milestones in 
the areas of: (i) governance, public administration reform and public financial management; (ii) 
green and digital transition; (iii) private sector development; (iv) human capital development and 
retention; and (v) fundamentals and the rule of law.

* * *

1.2 MAIN FINDINGS OF THE REPORT3 
THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
Democracy  
The framework for elections is conducive to the organisation of democratic elections. Kosovo 
continued to consolidate its new electoral legal framework. On 21 April 2024, Kosovo held a 
mayoral recall vote that aimed to pave the way for new local elections in the north of Kosovo. 
Despite some challenges, the vote was generally well organised. However, it failed due to an 
 
1  is presented in a renewed format and structure. Main findings of the report (previously grey 
assessment boxes), together with the recommendations are brought together at the beginning of the report. 
Furthermore, under the fundamentals, for better readability and comparability across all reports, certain data is 
provided (also) in the form of graphs. 
2 OJ L, 2024/1449, 24.5.2024. 
3 This report covers the period from 15 June 2023 to 1 September 2024. It is based on input from a variety of 
sources, including contributions from the government of Kosovo, EU Member States, European Parliament reports 
and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also includes the results of 
comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of law.  
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of preparation, 
moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made during the reporting 
period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, good progress and very 
good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been used. 
 
4 
 
extremely low voter turnout following the decision of political parties representing Kosovo Serbs 
in the north to withdraw from the process and call for a boycott. It is critical that inclusive local 
elections, in which Kosovo Serbs participate without preconditions, are held in all four 
municipalities in the north. 
The Assembly faces a number of challenges in the exercise of its powers. The government still 
holds a solid majority in the Assembly, but disagreements and lack of cooperation within the 
majority and with opposition parties hindered the Assembly’s ability to adopt legislation, to 
appoint members of public bodies and to provide effective oversight. Srpska Lista members 
boycotted the Assembly’s work during the reporting period. Strengthening consensus-building, 
transparency and oversight could improve the Assembly’s performance and help bring about a 
more stable and efficient legislative process. The Assembly needs to improve its internal 
management, adopt work plans, and introduce an electronic voting and presence recording 
system. 
The institutions in charge of the integration process are broadly in place. While Kosovo 
demonstrated strong commitment to its EU agenda, divisive domestic politics hampered 
implementation. The government should work to forge cross-party political support to pursue 
EU-related reforms more effectively. It should also include line ministries in decisions related to 
EU-related policies under their responsibility and increase interministerial coordination.  
As regards governance, initiatives to change responsibilities of certain ministries were met with 
criticism over the lack of public consultations and disregard for potential risks associated with 
these reforms. Kosovo made tangible progress in improving gender equality at central and local 
level. Challenges in the relationship between municipalities and central institutions persisted.  
Civil society organisations (CSOs) in Kosovo operate in a largely enabling environment. Civil 
society remained active and diverse, playing a meaningful role in designing, implementing and 
overseeing EU-related reforms. Kosovo has taken specific action to increase the transparency 
and accountability of public funding for CSOs, but challenges remain on the reporting and 
assessment of the effectiveness of allocated funds.  
Public administration reform  
Kosovo has some level of preparation and made limited progress in implementing last year’s 
recommendations. Kosovo advanced in reducing administrative burden by simplifying 
procedures through implementing the related programme for 2022-2027. However, the General 
Law on administrative procedure remains insufficiently implemented to ensure legal certainty. 
In general, the sector continues to face several challenges in ensuring a well-functioning civil 
service recruitment and remuneration system that can retain and attract qualified staff. Delayed 
reforms to restructure subordinated agencies perpetuate the inefficient organisation of 
administration, with blurred accountability lines. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ improve the merit-based civil service system by amending the Law on public officials in line 
with merit principles and the Law on the independent oversight board of civil service in line 
with the relevant Constitutional Court ruling; 
→ improve the efficiency of the civil service by: (i) reducing the number of vacant positions and 
those of acting senior management officials and putting in place effective annual planning 
and monitoring of human-resource management; (ii) finalising the process of job 
 
5 
 
classification and systematisation; and (iii) finalising the review of the internal organisation 
of public bodies at central level; 
→ improve the accountability and legal certainty of the public administration by: (i) speeding 
up the process of rationalisation of independent agencies; and (ii) continuing the reduction 
of administrative burden and digitalisation of services; 
→ revise the legislation on public financial management to align it with international standards, 
by particularly introducing a formal requirement to regularly prepare and publish a fiscal risk 
statement as part of the budget documentation; and ensuring that the public investment  
methodology is integrated into the revised legislation. 
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights 
Kosovo is between an early stage of preparation and having some level of preparation to apply 
the EU acquis and European standards on the judiciary and fundamental rights. Kosovo made 
limited progress by improving the functioning of the judiciary, stepping up the fight against 
corruption and strengthening the protection of fundamental rights. 
Functioning of the judiciary  
Kosovo is at an early stage of preparation on the functioning of the judiciary and made limited 
progress. Kosovo achieved a higher clearance rate and managed to reduce the backlog in civil 
cases. Continuous improvements were made on the use of the Case Management Information 
System. The functioning of the Kosovo Judicial Council (KJC) improved in terms of 
communication and transparency, while the Assembly finally elected all three lay members of 
the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council (KPC). However, the delays and struggle to jointly design 
justice reforms in line with the March 2023 joint commitment statement indicates a recurring 
lack of willingness to strengthen the justice system. Consultations on these reforms and on 
amendments to the law on the KPC were rushed and did not ensure a meaningful review. 
Despite strong EU advice, the Venice Commission was not consulted by the government and 
Assembly on the final amendments to the law on the KPC and on the other key reforms. This 
negatively affected the quality of legislation and its alignment with European standards. Work 
continued on handling gender-based violence cases, but faster progress is needed. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo needs, in particular, to: 
→ ensure that legislation concerning integrity and accountability of the judiciary are aligned 
with European standards and relevant Venice Commission recommendations, and step up 
the use of existing mechanisms on the accountability, integrity and eﬃciency of the justice 
system, with a particular focus on the roles and responsibilities of the KPC and KJC 
regarding implementation and monitoring of legislation and policies;  
→ further reform the court administration and strengthen the management capacity of the 
prosecution service and the judiciary to achieve strategic goals effectively, including further 
reducing the backlog of cases based on a clear action plan with audits and internal control, 
and implementing the IT strategy; 
→ ensure solid criminal investigations, improve the quality of indictments and ensure effective 
criminal procedures, including cases of gender-based violence. To this end, strengthen the 
cooperation between prosecutors and police as well as the prosecutors’ leading role in 
investigations. 
 
6 
 
Fight against corruption  
Kosovo is between an early stage of preparation and having some level of preparation in 
fighting corruption, and made limited progress overall. Additional institutions adopted integrity 
plans. The Assembly adopted the Law on the special prosecution office (SPO) to strengthen the 
criminal justice response to high-level corruption cases. There was some progress in 
adjudicating corruption cases, which resulted in a greater number of final court decisions and 
convictions. Nevertheless, results are affected by a shortage of resources and capacity and by a 
lack of impartiality and accountability in the prosecution service and the judiciary. Stronger 
commitment to establish a solid track record in fighting high-level corruption remains 
necessary, including by strengthening the use of anti-corruption tools such as asset 
declarations and public institutions’ integrity plans.   
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular:   
→ further strengthen the capacity of the Agency for the Prevention of Corruption (APC), in 
terms of staff and expertise, to ensure it can carry out its mandate effectively;  
→ further implement existing anti-corruption legislation; adopt a national strategy and action 
plan against corruption for 2024-2027 in line with European best practices and standards; 
→ strengthen the quality of investigation in high-level corruption cases, by increasing the 
capacity of the Special Investigative Unit of the police and ensuring its effective cooperation 
with the SPO. 
Fundamental rights  
In general, the legal framework guarantees the protection of fundamental rights and is in line 
with European standards. During the reporting period, Kosovo appointed a national coordinator 
and set up a central secretariat for combating gender-based violence. Some progress was 
made in implementing the Law on the rights of the child. The government adopted the Strategy 
for the protection and promotion of the rights of communities. Kosovo also finally implemented 
the judgment of the Constitutional Court on Dečani Monastery land ownership. Some progress 
was achieved on the verification process of diplomas from the university in North Mitrovica. 
However, legislation implementation needs further strengthening. Several government 
measures undermined the rights of non-majority communities. Adoption of the Civil Code 
remains pending. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Kosovo needs, in particular, to: 
→ address shortcomings related to protecting the rights of persons with disabilities, in 
particular by adopting the Law on status recognition, services and beneﬁts, and improving 
their access to rights in practice; 
→ strengthen implementation of the Law on gender equality and the Strategy on gender-based 
violence; appoint a new head of the Agency for Gender Equality; and enhance gender 
mainstreaming of legislation, regulations and policies; 
→ safeguard existing mechanisms protecting the rights of non-majority communities and 
improve their implementation. 
 
 
7 
 
Freedom of expression  
Kosovo has some level of preparation and made limited progress. Some improvement was 
made on freedom of media, including access to public documents. However, this was coupled 
with developments perceived as attempts by the government to exercise control over the 
media. A new law on the media regulator was adopted. It contributes to enhancing media 
regulation, but the Assembly’s amendments failed to reflect most recommendations from the 
EU and other international partners. The functioning of the Independent Media Commission 
improved. The public broadcaster faced instability with a number of resignations among top 
management and board members. It needs to swiftly address concerns related to editorial 
accountability and independence. The media in Kosovo is pluralistic, but the sector still lacks 
transparency and financial sustainability. Data on the audiovisual market remains insufficient, 
including on media ownership and financing. Attacks against journalists are given due attention 
by the police and the judiciary, but some level of impunity remains, including because of the 
difficulty to investigate complex cases which occurred in the north. The environment in the 
north of Kosovo is restrictive and conducive to self-censorship for the public, the media and 
CSOs.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ improve the capacity of the prosecutorial, judicial and law-enforcement authorities to handle 
cases related to the freedom of expression; 
→ develop protocols and training on the protection and safety of journalists, including early-
warning and rapid-response mechanisms; improve the working conditions of journalists and 
media workers; and strengthen professional reporting; 
→ ensure implementation of the new Law on the Independent Media Commission by ensuring 
full alignment with the EU acquis and European standards; and review the Law on the Radio -
Television of Kosovo to ensure sustainable funding, preserving its independence. 
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security  
Kosovo has some level of preparation and made some progress. The reaction to the September 
2023 attack in Banjska/Banjskë showed the high level of professionalism of the Kosovo Police. 
The Kosovo Police recruited two new generations of Kosovo Serb officers; the Special 
Prosecutor’s Office (SPO) recruited nine additional special prosecutors. The number of 
indictments in organised-crime cases has steadily increased. The new Law on the SPO makes it 
possible to set up multidisciplinary investigation teams in complex cases and provides a legal 
basis for the Special Investigation Unit of the police to handle high-level corruption cases. 
Kosovo adopted a new drugs strategy; the National Drug Observatory became operational. 
Kosovo improved migration governance and conducted an information campaign on visa-free 
travel to the EU which entered into force on 1 January 2024. Also, Kosovo adopted a new law on 
the Civil Registry Agency.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular:  
→ amend the Law on money laundering and terrorism ﬁnancing to fully harmonise it with the 
 
8 
 
corresponding EU directives; and increase the number of ﬁnal convictions for money 
laundering; set up a national centre for countering terrorism and violent extremism; 
→ continue to implement the EU Action Plan on Western Balkans for migration; implement an 
integrated border management system in line with the current legislation and the European 
best practices ; amend the Law on foreigners in line with EU standards; and progressively 
align its legislation with EU visa policy;  
→ maintain its communication campaign on rights and obligations associated with visa free 
travel to the EU, improve screenings at departures and engage with the most affected EU 
Member States to avoid unfunded asylum applications. 
Fight against organised crime 
Kosovo is between an early stage of preparation and having some level of preparation in the 
fight against organised crime and made some progress. The cooperation with Europol 
advanced, with Kosovo participating in joint operations and a Kosovo liaison officer deployment 
in Europol. The amount of information exchanged via the Secure Information Exchange Network 
Application (SIENA) significantly increased. The reorganisation of the police advanced and is 
pending final phases of the recruitment processes. As per recommendations, the Kosovo Police 
is directing its activities according to intelligence-led policing principles, and assigned officers 
implement the community policing approach. The police is conducting financial investigations 
more systematically. Some progress was achieved in the area of asset confiscation, while 
systemic improvement remains needed. The Ministry of Interior and its executive agencies 
adopted integrity plans. There was some progress in the fields of cybercrime, combating 
trafficking in human beings, and small arms and light weapons (SALW) control.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular:  
→ ﬁnd ways to ensure that police composition reﬂects the ethnic composition of Kosovo’s 
municipalities; 
→ adopt a new organised-crime strategy; further improve the investigation and prosecution of 
high-proﬁle organised crime, including money laundering; and proactively and jointly target 
and map organised criminal groups and networks; further strengthen the eﬃciency of the 
criminal conﬁscation regime, by establishing a conﬁscation fund and increasing use of 
conﬁscation tools by the prosecution and police; 
→ strengthen efforts to prevent and combat migrant smuggling and traﬃcking in human 
beings. 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND COMPETITIVENESS 
The existence of a functioning market economy 
Kosovo has some level of preparation and made good progress in developing a functioning 
market economy. Robust, albeit slower economic growth and a strong revenue performance 
underpinned a further decline in the budget deficit in 2023. Nevertheless, fiscal challenges 
persist given the narrow tax base, weaknesses in public investment management, and poor 
financial oversight and accountability of publicly-owned enterprises (POEs). Despite some 
 
9 
 
progress, the labour market outcomes remained weak. The banking sector continues to be well 
capitalised and stable. Some progress was made in improving the business environment and 
reducing informality.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In order to improve the functioning of the market economy, Kosovo should, in 
particular:  
→ improve the quality of public spending by addressing weaknesses in public investment 
management; 
→ strengthen the revenue base by reducing loopholes and exemptions by amending tax 
legislation;  
→ reduce fiscal risks by improving financial oversight and accountability of POEs. 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces in the EU 
Kosovo is at an early stage of preparation and made limited progress in terms of its capacity to 
cope with competitive pressure and market forces in the EU. The education system does not 
sufficiently provide the necessary skills and it is not adequately aligned with labour market 
needs. Some progress was made in promoting renewable energy sources and digitalising the 
economy. The latter remains highly reliant on small and micro firms, which cannot compete 
internationally. Trade openness increased significantly compared with 2019. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. 
To improve competitiveness and sustain long-term growth, Kosovo should, in particular:  
→ align education with labour market needs through close cooperation with the business 
community and by revising the legal framework on vocational education and training (VET) 
and adult education; 
→ develop transparent and competitive procedures for deployment of renewable energy; 
→ facilitate private-sector investments and improve mechanisms to attract FDI in strategic 
sectors promoting adoption of higher value-added products and services and innovation. 
Chapter 5 – Public procurement 
Kosovo is between having some level of preparation and a moderate level of preparation and 
made limited progress in the area of public procurement. Kosovo started to increase 
cooperation between public procurement institutions and contracting authorities by setting up a 
joint coordination secretariat. Despite some regulatory initiatives by the Public Procurement 
Regulatory Commission (PPRC), public procurement remains prone to irregularities and 
vulnerable to corruption.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular:  
→ adopt a new law on public procurement and a new law on concessions in line with the EU 
acquis; prepare the corresponding implementing legislation; and ensure proper 
implementation of this legislation; 
 
10 
 
→ ensure that the Procurement Review Body (PRB) is fully operational and remains functionally 
independent, with a strengthened capacity to ensure that its review process is timely, 
effective and transparent; 
→ upgrade its e-procurement platform in line with the new Law on public procurement and 
improve its eﬃciency, including interconnection with other relevant government IT systems. 
Chapter 18 – Statistics  
Kosovo has some level of preparation in the area. Kosovo made some progress with the 
dissemination of new statistical products and improved the frequency of data transmission to 
Eurostat. The population and housing census was conducted and preliminary results were 
released in July 2024.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ ensure better access to and use of available administrative data sources, with a particular 
focus on improving access to data from the Tax Authorities and Customs; 
→ continue to increase the number of statistical products and their dissemination by Eurostat; 
→ ﬁll existing vacancies and strengthen the capacity of the Kosovo Agency of Statistics (KAS).  
Chapter 32 – Financial control  
Kosovo has some level of preparation in this area and made limited progress. The 
implementation of the 2022-2026 public finance management strategy and its action plan 
related to public internal financial control (PIFC) remained slow. Implementation of internal 
audit recommendations and quality assurance remain low, and capacities of internal audit units 
and external audit remain weak. The parliamentary oversight of the management of public 
funds continued to be inefficient. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should:  
→ draft and adopt a new law on public financial management and accountability based on EU 
best practice and international standards; and harmonise the PIFC law with the new law on 
public finance management;  
→ improve the managerial accountability of budget users at both central and local levels by 
ensuring that managers are empowered and held accountable based on clear performance 
criteria;  
→ improve cooperation between the National Audit Office (NAO) and the Assembly by 
improving the parliamentary scrutiny of budget execution and by continuously and 
efficiently implementing and following up on NAO audit recommendations. 
 
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET 
Chapter 1 – Free movement of goods   
 
11 
 
Kosovo is between having some level of preparation and a moderate level of preparation in this 
area. Limited progress was made in implementing the Law on general product safety and the 
Law on inspections.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ make progress on market surveillance and mutual recognition in line with the EU acquis and 
increase the enforcement capacity of the conformity assessment and market surveillance 
bodies;  
→ continue the implementation of the new Law on general product safety and Law on 
inspections and adopt relevant secondary legislation; 
→ start implementing the requirements of the EU Regulation on the registration, evaluation, 
authorisation and restriction of chemicals (REACH). 
Chapter 2 – Freedom of movement for workers  
Kosovo has some level of preparation in the field of free movement for workers and made 
limited progress. Negotiations on bilateral agreements on social security with Slovenia, Croatia 
and Austria are ongoing. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ progress on negotiations on new bilateral agreements on social security, in particular with 
EU Member States; 
→ start work to prepare for joining the European network of employment services (EURES); 
→ start to work on legislation to preserve the supplementary pension rights of mobile workers 
who have worked abroad, including in EU Member States. 
Chapter 3 – Right of establishment and freedom to provide services  
Kosovo remains moderately prepared and made limited progress. Kosovo’s postal market is 
fully liberalised and the legal framework is in line with the EU Postal Services Directive. 
However, sectoral laws are still not compliant with the EU Services Directive and the related 
action plan expired with no satisfactory implementation. The point of single contact is not fully 
functional. Kosovo needs to align its legal framework with the EU acquis on recognition of 
professional qualifications.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially addressed and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ remove the identiﬁed barriers to the right of establishment and the freedom to provide 
services; and adopt and implement a new action plan to make sectoral laws compliant with 
the EU Services Directive; 
→ align with the Regulation on cross-border parcel delivery service, and strengthen the 
institutional capacity to monitor and ensure compliance with the new rules in the postal 
market; 
→ align its legal framework with the EU acquis on mutual recognition of professional 
 
12 
 
qualiﬁcations, including the Directive on recognition of professional qualiﬁcations and the 
Directive on a proportionality test before adopting new regulation of professions. 
Chapter 4 – Free movement of capital 
Kosovo is moderately prepared and made limited progress, with improvements in the exchange 
of information and supervisory capacities in the fight against money laundering and terrorism 
financing.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially addressed and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ further align its legal framework with the EU Payment Services Directive 2; 
→ step up action to ﬁght economic and ﬁnancial crime; and align the Law on the prevention of 
money laundering and terrorist ﬁnancing with the EU acquis; 
→ continue to strengthen interinstitutional cooperation in the ﬁght against economic and 
ﬁnancial crime; and boost the effectiveness of conﬁscation of assets and proceeds of 
crime. 
Chapter 6 – Company law  
Kosovo has some level of preparation, with no progress made in further aligning its legal 
framework with the EU acquis on company law.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain largely 
valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular:  
→ ﬁnalise and adopt the draft law on business organisations to further align its legal 
framework with the EU acquis on company law,  
→ further align with the most recent acquis on the use of digital tools and processes in 
company law and on cross-border conversions, mergers and divisions; 
→ further align its legal framework with the EU acquis on company reporting, country by 
country reporting, corporate sustainability reporting and transparency, as well as strengthen 
both 
the 
institutional 
audit 
oversight 
structures 
and 
the 
professional 
independence/objectivity of auditors and audit firms; and ensure that these structures are 
sufficiently and sustainably funded. 
Chapter 7 – Intellectual property law  
Kosovo is moderately prepared in the area of intellectual property rights. Some progress was 
achieved by adopting the new Law on copyright and related rights. The Commercial Court, 
which is mandated to solve cases and disputes in this field, has commenced its work efficiently. 
Kosovo should strengthen its capacity and resources to better implement and enforce the legal 
framework on IPR.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular:  
→ improve implementation of adopted legislation in terms of strategy and sufficient capacity; 
→ adopt implementing legislation of industrial property laws (topographies of semiconductor 
 
13 
 
products and trade secrets). 
→ strengthen collaboration with the European Union Intellectual Property Office, taking 
advantage of its expertise, networks and specialised databases. 
Chapter 8 – Competition policy  
Kosovo has some level of preparation and made limited progress in this area. While Kosovo 
continued to revise the legal competition framework, it did not progress much in the area of 
State aid.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular:  
→ set up a functional State aid commission, in line with SAA obligations; 
→ align the legislative framework in the area of State aid with the EU acquis; and ensure 
enforcement of competition and State aid legislation; 
→ guarantee the operational independence and functional capacity of competition and State 
aid authorities; and increase coordination between all stakeholders, including ministries, 
regulators and the judiciary. 
Chapter 9 – Financial services  
Kosovo is moderately prepared and made some progress on the governance of the central 
bank. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ align its legal framework with the Solvency II Directive; and ensure the implementation of the 
relevant legislation; 
→ continue efforts to align with the EU acquis related to the regulation of securities markets, 
investment funds, investment services, financial markets infrastructures and digital finance; 
→ align its legal framework with the revised versions of the EU Capital Requirements Directive, 
Capital Requirements Regulation, Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive and Deposit 
Guarantee Scheme Directive.  
Chapter 28 – Consumer and health protection 
Kosovo is at an early stage of preparation in this area. There was limited progress except for 
the adoption of the Law on prevention and control of communicable diseases and the Law on 
pricing of pharmaceutical products.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should: 
→ adopt the law on consumer protection and fully implement the Law on general product 
safety; 
→ introduce appropriate health ﬁnancing reforms to ensure progress towards universal health 
coverage; and improve the eﬃciency and quality of health services; 
 
14 
 
→ introduce measures to reduce the risk factors for non-communicable diseases / chronic 
conditions in order to protect human capital and ensure future economic growth.  
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH  
Chapter 10: Digital transformation and media 
Kosovo has some level of preparation in the area of digital transformation and media. 
Kosovo made limited progress in preparing to align its legislation with the EU acquis by 
further strengthening its legal and strategic framework, particularly with the adoption of the 
e-government strategy and the cybersecurity strategy and accompanying action plan. 
Kosovo signed and ratified the Association Agreement with the European Commission to 
join the EU-funded Digital Europe Programme.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should: 
→ align its legislation with the European Electronic Communications Code, the EU Network 
and Information Security Directive (NIS2), the EU Toolbox for 5G cybersecurity, and the 
Digital Services Act and the Digital Markets Act;  
→ ensure that telecommunication and media regulators are given appropriate resources to 
fulﬁl their mandates independently; and develop a solution to ensure that the public 
service broadcaster is sustainably funded; 
→ implement number portability to ensure effective use of numbering resources and 
encourage competition. 
Chapter 16 – Taxation 
Kosovo has some level of preparation in this area and made some progress in implementing 
risk-based audits and service digitalisation. Compliance audits and formalisation measures led 
to higher tax revenues.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular:  
→ initiate a tax policy revision, including personal income tax, corporate income tax, value 
added tax and excise duties; and further align its tax legislation with the EU acquis; 
→ approve the new strategy for combating the informal economy, money laundering, ﬁnancing 
of terrorism and ﬁnancial crime (2023-2026); 
→ strengthen the administrative and professional capacity of the Tax Administration of Kosovo 
(TAK) by setting out clear rules on jobs, recruitment, performance evaluation, merit-based 
promotion, and transfers. 
Chapter 17 – Economic and monetary policy  
Kosovo is moderately prepared and some progress was made in this area. A normalisation of 
the operations of the central bank took place following the appointment of the three deputy 
governors and the functional reorganisation of the central bank. Some progress was made in 
collecting data and transmitting it to Eurostat. However, methodological inconsistencies 
persisted in some areas.  
 
15 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ increase its capacity to report on government ﬁnancial statistics according to the ESA 2010; 
and ensure regular monitoring of standards; 
→ improve the quality of macroeconomic forecasting in the budgetary process. 
Chapter 19 – Social policy and employment 
Kosovo is between an early stage of preparation and having some level of preparation in this 
area. There was good progress, in particular by finalising the new employment strategy, drafting 
of the new Law on employment, intensifying inspections in work sectors with higher risks, 
launching of a Youth Guarantee Scheme pilot in two municipalities, and launching of a thorough 
reform on social assistance. The rate of fatal occupational accidents declined compared with 
previous years.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming period, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ prepare for a full roll-out of the Youth Guarantee scheme, based on lessons learnt during the 
pilot phase; adopt the Law on employment and amendments to the Law on labour to align 
its legal framework with the recent EU acquis, notably in relation to non-discrimination in 
employment and parental leave; 
→ intensify inspections in work sectors with higher risks; adopt the new Law on health and 
safety at work and a corresponding strategy; enforce rules and standards on health and 
safety at work; and strengthen social dialogue; 
→ continue to reform social assistance schemes to make it pro-poor; improve access to social 
services, in particular for children and persons with disabilities; and improve the capacity of 
municipalities, in particular regarding social budget execution, outsourcing of services, and 
quality assurance.  
Chapter 20 – Enterprise and industrial policy 
Kosovo is moderately prepared in the area, and the government made some progress by 
continuing to implement the 2030 strategy for industrial development and business support.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming period, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ move forward with the implementation of the strategy for industrial development and 
business support for 2030, and the sustainable economic growth pillar of the national 
development strategy for 2021-2030; 
→ urgently improve the capacity of the Ministry of Industry, Entrepreneurship and Trade; 
→ complete the establishment of the two separate investment promotion and SME support 
agencies; and ensure that both are suﬃciently resourced. 
Chapter 25 – Science and research   
Kosovo is at an early stage of preparation. Kosovo made limited progress by taking further 
steps towards a strategic approach to research, for instance by approving the National Science 
 
16 
 
Programme for 2023-2028. Kosovo could not maintain its performance in the EU’s framework 
programme on research and innovation. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ devise and implement a gender strategy for research at national level, as well as for full 
integration and promotion of women and girls in research and in science, technology, 
engineering and mathematics; 
→ intensify measures to establish a positive trend in the Horizon Europe participation and 
advance in developing a Smart Specialisation Strategy; 
→ establish a system to reliably provide research, science and technology, and innovation 
statistics. 
Chapter 26 – Education and culture  
Kosovo has some level of preparation in the field of education and culture. There was limited 
progress during the reporting period. The implementation of the new Law on early childhood 
education commenced with the piloting of new curricula for the 2023/2024 academic year. A 
reform on the recruitment of staff in the education sector, including inspectors, was approved. 
Despite these measures, results are not yet visible, and the quality of education still needs 
major improvement. Kosovo’s participation in Erasmus+ is improving, confirming the positive 
trend of the past year. While the Law on art and culture was adopted, a culture strategy is still 
pending.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ implement the roadmap outlined in Kosovo’s education strategy for 2022-2026; and 
continue to follow up on the recommendations under the European Training Foundation 
Rapid Education Diagnosis, such as on VET governance and quality assessment of teachers 
and schools; 
→ ﬁnalise the implementation of the new curricular framework for basic education; complete 
the revision of current textbooks and provide sustainable training to teachers; and 
systematically apply quality assurance mechanisms at all education levels; 
→ continue work to strengthen VET governance and increase the quality of VET for professions 
in demand in view of the Youth Guarantee.  
Chapter 29 – Customs union 
Kosovo is moderately prepared and made good progress by adopting the new Customs and 
Excise Code, expanding the use of publicly operated customs terminals, and significantly 
reducing customs terminal fees. The number of authorised economic operators increased. 
Significant steps were initiated to strengthen the administrative and professional capacity of 
Kosovo customs. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented. In the coming year, 
Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ draft and approve the implementing legislation for the new Customs and Excise Code; 
 
17 
 
→ continue to strengthen the administrative and professional capacity of its customs by 
ﬁnalising and implementing the new Administrative Instruction, and by implementing the 
Customs and Excise Code rules on jobs, performance evaluation, merit-based promotion 
and transfers;  
→ abolish all fees charged to exporters/importers at public, publicly operated and private 
inland customs terminals. 
 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY  
Chapter 14 – Transport policy 
Kosovo is at an early stage of preparation in the area and made some progress by adopting 
the action plan for the implementation of the multimodal transport strategy, approving the 
strategy on an intelligent transport system, and opening new air corridors with Albania. More 
action is needed to implement the EU acquis. Last year’s recommendations remain partly 
valid. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should: 
→ adopt the new Law on roads; invest in road maintenance and inspections; continue 
prevention campaigns; and set up a systematic monitoring mechanism for collecting 
crash data;  
→ align its legal framework with the EU rail acquis, particularly the 4th railway package for 
both the market and technical pillar;  
→ adopt the action plan for the intelligent transport system strategy and ensure suﬃcient 
capacity and resources are made available for its implementation; and harmonise the 
legislative framework with the EU passenger rights acquis across all modes of transport. 
Chapter 15 – Energy 
Kosovo has some level of preparation in the area of energy. Kosovo made some progress in 
this area by adopting the Law on renewable energy sources, launching of the day-ahead market 
coupling with Albania, successfully concluded the first solar auction and making further 
investments in increasing energy efficiency in public and residential buildings. However, 
Kosovo remains heavily reliant on outdated coal-fired power plants and needs to accelerate the 
deployment of renewable energy sources in line with its new energy strategy. The Kosovo 
transmission system operator, KOSTT, should ensure compliance with its obligation under the 
Connection Agreement with ENTSO-E, with no deviation from the grid. Kosovo needs to adopt 
as soon as possible its national energy and climate plan (NECP), in line with the Energy 
Community Secretariat recommendations.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially addressed and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular:  
→ adopt the amended package of energy laws to ensure alignment with the Electricity 
Integration Package and Clean Energy Package; and launch the ﬁrst wind auction;  
→ speed up the environmental upgrade of the Kosovo B thermal power plant and the works 
 
18 
 
for the decommissioning of the non-working parts of the Kosovo A thermal power plant;  
→ improve the implementation of energy eﬃciency legislation including in the area of energy 
performance of buildings; and continue the roll-out of energy eﬃciency investments in 
public and residential buildings. 
Chapter 21 – Trans-European Networks 
Kosovo has some level of preparation in the area. Limited progress in this area was made by 
continuing works on Rail Route 10 and initiating the day-ahead electricity market coupling with 
Albania. The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially addressed and 
remain largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should: 
→ implement the pending connectivity projects; and strengthen its institutional and 
administrative capacity to implement strategic infrastructure projects; 
→ proceed with the signalling works; and complete the first phase of Rail Route 10; 
→ improve the capacity of the regulatory authority for electronic and postal communications 
to enforce telecommunications market regulations. 
Chapter 27 – Environment and climate change 
Kosovo is at an early stage of preparation in the area and made limited progress, with the 
adoption of the Law on climate change in December 2023 being the only significant 
development. Administrative and human-resource capacities in the whole sector are at a 
critically low level and represent a significant obstacle to its proper and progressive 
development.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially addressed and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular:  
→ demonstrate political commitment by signiﬁcantly strengthening the administrative 
capacity of the environment and climate sectors at both local and central levels;  
→ amend the Law and the integrated strategy on waste management; and ensure that 
appropriate measures are taken for the de facto prevention of pollution of protected areas 
and the management of protected areas;  
→ adopt the NECP as soon as possible, and implement the Law on climate change, in 
particular the framework for the monitoring, reporting, veriﬁcation and accreditation of 
greenhouse gas emissions, with a view to introducing carbon pricing to align the legal 
framework with the EU emissions trading system. 
 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION  
Chapter 11 – Agriculture  
Kosovo has some level of preparation in agriculture and rural development. Kosovo made some 
progress in this area with the adoption of the Law on market organisation for agricultural 
products, the national programme for agriculture and rural development for 2023-2027, the 
strategic plan of the Kosovo advisory system for agriculture and rural development for 2023-
2027 and the national organic action plan for 2023-2026.   
 
19 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially addressed and remain largely 
valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ strengthen the administrative and technical capacity of both the Department of Rural 
Development Policy (managing authority) and the Agency for Agricultural Development 
(paying agency); 
→ adopt the Law on agriculture and rural development advisory services and the implementing 
legislation on the market organisation for agricultural products; 
→ amend or repeal the Law on agricultural land; and take urgent and effective measures to 
stop the loss of agricultural land. 
Chapter 12 – Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy  
Kosovo is between having some level of preparation and a moderate level of preparation in 
this area. Good progress was made. In particular, Kosovo took over the responsibility of fully 
financing the oral rabies vaccination campaigns and finalised the laboratory information 
management system and the food control and traceability management system, which is a 
prerequisite for a competitive agri-food sector. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially addressed and remain largely 
valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ ensure the sustainability of the food control and traceability management system and of the 
laboratory information management system; and strengthen the administrative capacity of 
the implementing bodies by increasing the number and expertise of the staff; 
→ adopt the draft law on animal health; approve the 5-year development plan for disease 
monitoring and control; and ensure appropriate financial and human resources for their 
implementation; 
→ start work on the harmonisation and adoption of legislation in the area of phytosanitary 
policy, in line with the EU acquis. 
Chapter 13 – Fisheries and aquaculture 
Kosovo remains at an early stage of preparation in this chapter and made no progress.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ adopt a multiannual strategy dedicated to aquaculture; and strengthen the administrative 
capacity of the implementing bodies by increasing the number and expertise of the staff; 
→ draft a law on ﬁsheries and aquaculture and further align its market policy with the acquis; 
→ create an inventory of ﬁsh species covering the entire territory of Kosovo. 
Chapter 22 – Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments 
Kosovo remains at an early stage of preparation in the area of regional policy and 
coordination of structural instruments. Some progress was made by improving the legislative 
and strategic framework, programming and monitoring. 
 
20 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular:  
→ further improve the administrative capacity for programming, management, monitoring 
and evaluation of EU funds, particularly in line ministries; 
→ strengthen public investment management as a matter of urgency by adopting: (i) 
updated single and sector project pipelines, based on sound, transparent and inclusive 
public investment selection; and (ii) a methodology for effective and transparent 
management of the government expenditures for public infrastructure; 
→ create a structured and inclusive sector-based policy dialogue to improve and guide the 
programming of EU funds and the coordination of donor support. 
 
CLUSTER 6: EXTERNAL RELATIONS  
Chapter 30 – External relations 
Kosovo is at an early stage of preparation in the area of external relations, with limited progress 
made. Despite progress in implementing the Common Regional Market (CRM) Action Plan for 
2021-2024, Kosovo has still not ratified the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) 
additional protocols on trade facilitation and trade in services. Kosovo should abstain from 
taking further unilateral trade measures without justification and prior consultation with the 
Commission, in line with its SAA commitments. Kosovo showed a constructive attitude in the 
process to unblock CEFTA decision making which has led to 12 agreements being adopted. 
While there was an increase in exports, the trade deficit remained high, and Kosovo has yet to 
adopt a comprehensive trade policy. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should, in particular: 
→ continue to implement commitments under the CRM Action Plan for 2021-2024 and 
implement actions under the new action plan for 2025-2028, ratify and implement the 
CEFTA Additional Protocol (AP) 5 on trade facilitation,  AP 6 on trade in services and take 
the necessary steps to implement and ﬁnalise AP 7 on dispute settlement; 
→ approve the Regulation on the establishment of the trade facilitation enquiry point; 
→ start the process of establishing a development and humanitarian aid policy. 
 
***