4 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1. CONTEXT 
The EU-Kosovo Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) has been in force since April 
2016. A second phase of the European Reform Agenda was adopted in October 2021 to further 
guide the implementation of EU-related reforms under the SAA framework. The authorities 
continued to demonstrate visibly their commitment to Kosovo’s European path. 
The Commission’s proposal to lift visa requirements for Kosovo citizens is still pending 
in the Council. The Commission maintains its assessment from July 2018 that Kosovo 
has fulfilled all visa liberalisation benchmarks. The European Parliament reconfirmed its support 
for the Commission’s proposal for visa liberalisation. 
The EU-facilitated dialogue on the normalisation of relations between Kosovo and Serbia 
continued with meetings at leaders’ and chief negotiators’ level. 
The COVID-19 pandemic continued throughout the reporting period. The public health 
containment measures and other restrictions introduced to limit the severity of the pandemic 
were lifted in May 2022. During the reporting period, Kosovo adopted two fiscal packages in 
order 
to 
mitigate 
the 
severe 
economic 
and 
social 
impact 
of 
the 
crisis.  
After Russia’s invasion of Ukraine began at the end of February 2022, Kosovo immediately 
condemned Russia’s war of aggression and expressed support for Ukraine’s independence, 
sovereignty and territorial integrity. The government adopted several packages of restrictive 
measures against Russia and Belarus, mirroring the measures imposed by the EU and the United 
States. The government also responded to the refugee crisis, suspending its visa regime for 
citizens of Ukraine. Kosovo declared its readiness to accept up to 5 000 refugees and to host 20 
Ukrainian journalists. 
1.2. SUMMARY OF THE REPORT1  
The reporting period overlapped with the first full year in office of the Vetëvendosje-led 
government. Kosovo enjoyed political stability, with the government holding a solid majority in 
the Assembly.  
The Assembly’s work continued to be negatively affected by a polarised political atmosphere 
and difficulties in achieving decision-making quorum, even though the government relies on a 
strong majority. This is partly due to poor management of the legislative agenda on the part of 
the majority but also because opposition members of the Assembly (MPs) abstained from voting 
to prevent legislation from being adopted. 
                                                            
1 This report covers the period from June 2021 to June 2022. It is based on input from a variety of sources, including 
contributions from the government of Kosovo, and EU Member States, European Parliament reports and 
information from various international and non-governmental organisations. This also includes the results of 
comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular on rule of law. 
The report uses the following assessment scales to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of preparation, 
moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made during the reporting 
period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, good progress, and 
very good progress. Where appropriate, also interim steps have been used. 
 
5 
 
The 2021 municipal elections were overall well-organised, transparent and competitive. 
Kosovo’s electoral process still needs comprehensive strengthening to address long-standing 
weaknesses throughout the electoral cycle, as identified in successive EU election observation 
missions since 2014.  
The situation in the north of Kosovo remains challenging, in particular in terms of corruption, 
organised crime, and the conditions for freedom of expression. 
There is some level of preparation in the area of public administration reform, but limited 
progress was made in this area. Notably, some key positive steps were taken by developing 
overarching strategies on public administration reform (PAR) and public finance management 
(PFM) for 2022-2026, adopting legislation to proceed with the first wave of streamlining of 
public agencies and launching the development of a new salary law. There has been little 
progress in implementing the existing legislative framework for public administration reform.  
Kosovo is still at an early stage in developing a well-functioning judicial system. While some 
progress was made, the overall administration of justice continues to be slow, inefficient and 
vulnerable to undue influence. Steps were taken to start implementing the rule of law strategy 
and action plan and to reform the legislative framework governing the prosecutorial system by 
amending the Law on the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council. Justice reform should be addressed first 
and foremost by improving the implementation of existing tools to safeguard the integrity, the 
independence and the efficiency of the judicial system. The government’s commitment to fully 
implement the Venice Commission’s Opinion on the concept document on vetting of judges and 
prosecutors, in close cooperation with the EU, is welcome.  
Kosovo is at an early stage / has some level of preparation in the fight against corruption.  
During the reporting period, some progress was made with the adoption of significant anti-
corruption legislation. There is a need to improve the implementation of the overall legal 
framework. Sustained efforts are needed to achieve more proactive investigations, final court 
decisions and final confiscation of assets. Despite the efforts already made, there is a need for 
strong political will to continue to effectively address systemic corruption risks and a robust 
criminal justice response to high-level corruption. 
Kosovo is at an early stage in the fight against organised crime and limited progress 
was made in investigating and prosecuting organised crime cases. The powerful tools envisaged 
by the Criminal Code and the Law on Extended Powers of Confiscation are not yet fully utilised. 
A number of successful operations targeting organised crime took place, involving international 
and cross-border cooperation. Fighting organised crime in the north of Kosovo continues to be 
challenging.  
Some progress was made in the fight against terrorism and the fight against and prevention of 
violent extremism, in line with the objectives set out in the EU-Kosovo implementing 
arrangement for the Joint Action Plan on Counter-Terrorism for the Western Balkans. The 
Kosovo authorities need to be more effective in their efforts to combat money laundering and the 
applicable law should be brought in line with the EU acquis and international standards. The 
legal framework broadly guarantees the protection of human and fundamental rights in 
line with European standards. Kosovo showed commitment to addressing gender inequality. 
More needs to be done to effectively guarantee the rights of persons belonging to 
 
6 
 
minorities, including Roma2 and Ashkali and displaced persons, to ensure gender equality in 
practice, and to advance the protection of cultural heritage. The lack of administrative 
instructions to implement the law on child protection hampers further progress in this area. As 
regards freedom of expression, Kosovo has some level of preparation and benefits from a 
pluralistic and lively media environment. However, concerns remain regarding public smear 
campaigns, threats and physical attacks on journalists. The lack of financial self-sustainability 
leaves the media, including the public broadcaster, vulnerable to political and business interests.  
The Kosovo authorities continued to make progress in managing migration. Migration 
governance and asylum should be further strengthened.  
Kosovo made some progress on the economic criteria, and is at an early stage 
of developing a functioning market economy. The economy demonstrated resilience during the 
pandemic. Nevertheless, long-standing structural challenges, such as the widespread informal 
economy, the high prevalence of corruption and the overall weak rule of law, continue to hinder 
the private sector.  
While the fiscal rule has been suspended since 2020, the economic recovery as well as 
formalisation gains led to a strong increase in tax revenue and a low public deficit in 2021. 
Driven by surging commodity prices, inflation increased substantially. The financial sector 
remained stable, and lending continued to expand. Despite strong political opposition, the 
government took fiscally prudent positions regarding war veterans’ pensions and the Kosovo 
Pension Savings Trust.  
Kosovo made limited progress and is at an early stage in terms of ability to cope with 
competitive pressure and market forces in the EU. Little progress was made on improving 
the quality of education and addressing skill gaps in the labour market. Kosovo made some 
progress in improving road infrastructure and increasing investment in renewables, but the 
coal-based, outdated and unreliable energy supply remains a concern. Kosovo still lacks a long-
term energy strategy. Kosovo made some progress in digitalising the economy.  
As regards good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation, Kosovo continued to 
participate in most regional fora. Kosovo maintained overall good relations with Albania, 
Montenegro and North Macedonia. There has been no change in Kosovo’s formal relations 
with Bosnia and Herzegovina, which does not recognise Kosovo’s independence and the two 
maintain a strict visa regime. 
The EU-facilitated Dialogue on the normalisation of relations with Serbia continued with regular 
monthly meetings on the level of Chief Negotiators and a High-level meeting on 18 August 
2022. The Parties adopted an Energy Agreements’ Implementation Roadmap in June 2022 and 
agreed on travel with only identity cards between Kosovo and Serbia in August 2022. Kosovo 
needs to engage more constructively and make further substantial efforts on the implementation 
of all past agreements and contribute to reaching a comprehensive legally binding normalisation 
agreement with Serbia. Such an agreement is urgent and crucial to enable Kosovo and Serbia to 
advance on their respective European paths.  
                                                            
2 All these groups are considered under the wider ‘’Roma‘’ umbrella term under the EU framework for National 
Roma Integration Strategies. 
 
7 
 
During the reporting period some progress was made in aligning with European standards in the 
area of statistics and financial control, while limited progress was achieved in aligning with 
European standards in the areas of public procurement. In most of the areas related to the internal 
market, Kosovo has some level of preparation, including on competition. During the reporting 
period, Kosovo made some progress in all areas, except on consumer policy and health 
protection, where only limited progress was made. 
Kosovo made some progress in the areas of competitiveness and inclusive growth (customs, 
taxation, economic and monetary policy, digital transformation and media, enterprise and 
industrial policy, social policy and employment, education and culture) and limited progress in 
the area of research.  
On the Green Agenda for the Western Balkans and sustainable connectivity, Kosovo made some 
progress in the area of transport and limited progress in the areas of energy, environment and 
climate change. In the field of resources and agriculture, Kosovo made some progress on food 
safety, veterinary policy and phytosanitary policy, but only limited progress on agriculture.  
On external relations and trade policy, Kosovo made limited progress during the reporting period 
and is at an early stage of preparation. Kosovo has not yet ratified the Central European Free 
Trade Agreement’s additional protocols on trade facilitation and trade in services. Kosovo 
introduced export restrictions on a number of agricultural food products without justifications or 
prior consultation with the Commission.  
Overall, Kosovo needs to improve its administrative capacity and coordination, across all 
sectors, to achieve effective implementation of the EU acquis. 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
2.1. 
FUNCTIONING OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION REFORM 
2.1.1 Democracy 
The reporting period overlapped with the first full year in office of the Vetëvendosje-led 
government. Kosovo enjoyed political stability, with the government holding a solid majority in 
the Assembly. This political enviroment has been conducive to Kosovo stepping up its efforts to 
strenghten democracy and the rule of law, to fight corruption and to intensify legislative 
activities, including on EU-related reforms.  
Opposition parties generally remained actively engaged in the Assembly, and on some occasions 
supported key EU-related legislation. However, a frequent lack of quorum in the Assembly and 
boycotts by opposition parties caused delays in adopting key laws.   
In autumn 2021 Kosovo held regular local elections. Despite shortcomings, the elections were 
overall well-administered and transparent. They were also competitive, except in Kosovo Serb 
areas. Women remain under-represented at all levels of participation and decision-making: in 
political parties, electoral administration, as well as central and local assemblies.  
 
8 
 
Elections  
The 2021 municipal elections were overall well-organised, transparent and competitive. The 
campaign was vibrant, and a plurality of contestants offered voters a real choice, with the 
exception of the Kosovo-Serb municipalities, where political competition was limited. The very 
low number of women in mayoral races reflects low female political participation in Kosovo. 
Kosovo should address long-standing weaknesses, as identified by successive EU election 
observation missions since 2014. Kosovo should implement all the recommendations, in 
particular regarding procedural shortcomings and disproportionate restrictions that contradict 
international standards. The Assembly established an ad hoc committee to address these 
recommendations. Key recommendations should be implemented well in advance of the next 
elections. The new electoral legislation should contain safeguards that limit political interference 
in the electoral process.  
Kosovo held regular mayoral and municipal assembly elections on 17 October 2021 in all 38 
municipalities, and 21 mayoral election run-offs on 14 November 2021. Elections were assessed 
by observers as well-administered and competitive, while the election campaign was peaceful. 
Vote counting and the tabulation of results were assessed as transparent, yet the process was 
lengthy and marred by significant weaknesses.  
In the first round, 17 out of 38 mayors were elected. The run-off mayoral elections took place 
four weeks later in the remaining 21 municipalities, including in the two biggest cities, Pristina 
and Prizren. Voter turnout in the first round was 42.72%, and 37.08% in the runoffs.  
Out of 14 women mayoral candidates, only two were placed in their party’s electoral strongholds 
and both were elected. A total of 1 937 women (37%) stood for municipal assembly seats, in 
accordance with the 30% gender quota for including women on electoral lists, and 36 of them 
(12%) headed lists. Few political parties exceeded the 30% gender quota, and therefore did not 
meet the 50% target for representation foreseen in the Law on Gender Equality. 
The legal framework for elections remains unchanged since 2010. Kosovo should address all 
shortcomings and contradictory provisions in the law. Almost all recommendations offered by 
previous EU electoral observation missions remain unaddressed, mainly due to the frequency of 
early parliamentary elections. Political parties need to deliver on their commitment and to 
actively participate in the ad hoc committee to address all recommendations from successive EU 
observation and expert missions in a comprehensive and transparent manner.  
Political parties need to seriously address the issue of gender inequality in their programmes 
and statutes, and to take affirmative action to overcome the obstacles that limit women’s 
participation in political life. Kosovo needs to harmonise verification mechanisms for and 
restrictions on candidates with criminal records in line with international standards. The 
Assembly adopted the Law on Political Party Financing and Campaign Financing.  
Parliament  
The Assembly’s work continued to be negatively affected by a polarised political atmosphere 
and a lack of decision-making quorum, despite the fact that the government relies on a solid 
majority of 67 seats (out of 120). The Assembly increased the use of fast track/accelerated 
procedures for adoption of key legislation. Efforts are needed to strengthen the role of the 
Assembly as a forum for constructive political dialogue and consensus-building, particularly 
 
9 
 
regarding the EU reform agenda. The Assembly adopted new rules of procedure. The Assembly 
still needs to improve its internal management, adopt an annual work plan, swiftly move from a 
show-of-hand system to electronic voting and strengthen its oversight function.  
The Assembly remained the main forum for political dialogue between the ruling majority, 
opposition and non-majority communities. However, inflammatory language against political 
opponents continued to be used in debates. The majority and the opposition need to improve 
political dialogue and work together to further advance the EU reform agenda and build 
consensus around major reforms. Due to the local elections in the autumn of 2021, the 
Assembly’s work slowed down as MPs engaged in the electoral campaign.  
Frequent absences of members of the Assembly Presidency in meetings, the non-participation of 
Srpska Lista, and later the resignation of the Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) Vice-President 
upon his election as mayor of Mitrovicë/a, made it frequently impossible for the Assembly 
Presidency to reach a quorum to hold meetings. 
Regarding the Assembly’s legislative role, it often lacked a decision-making quorum, partly due 
to poor management of the legislative agenda on the part of the majority but also because 
opposition members of the Assembly (MPs) abstained from voting in order to prevent the 
adoption of legislation. As a result, agenda items were delayed for months. 
During the reporting period, the Assembly approved 77 laws, 27 of which related to the 
ratification of international agreements. A total of 21 laws, including the Law on Budget 2022 
and the Law on Mid-year 2022 Budget Review were approved by accelerated procedure, thereby 
deviating from the deadlines provided by the rules of procedure. With regard to EU-related 
reforms, the Assembly adopted a number of significant pieces of legislation, amongst others the 
law on asset declarations and on political party financing.  
The Assembly plenary debated regular annual reports of independent bodies. The Assembly 
should support the work of the independent regulators and institutions more systemically, by 
appointing their board members in a timely manner and ensuring regular monitoring of the 
implementation of the recommendations provided by committees. 
The Assembly has no annual work plan. The Assembly needs to improve the planning and 
coordination of its work to ensure a more predictable law-making process and attendance of MPs 
and ministers. 
For over a year the Assembly has not reinstated the electronic voting technology and continued 
using a show-of-hand voting system, which on many occasions led to incorrect voting results. 
More importantly, under the show-of-hands voting system the Assembly does not publish the 
voting records of MPs, which undermines transparency and accountability to the public. 
There were efforts to improve parliamentary oversight of all government branches; yet, 
effective control remains weak. The Assembly exercised its oversight of the executive through 
sessions for parliamentary questions, ministerial hearings by committees, and monitoring of 
implementation of laws. The Assembly has to exercise all available tools to hold the government 
and other institutions to account. 
Governance 
During the reporting period, Kosovo enjoyed political and institutional stability, which provided 
a conductive environment and opportunities to implement EU-related reforms and adopt overdue 
 
10 
 
legislation. In this context, some progress was made in adopting and implementing EU-related 
reforms. Kosovo adopted the National Programme for the Implementation of the Stabilisation 
and Association Agreement (NIPSAA) and the European Reform Agenda (ERA) II Action Plan. 
Kosovo has strenghtened its capacity to coordinate the implementation of commitments and 
obligations arising out of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) and ERA II, and 
has improved reporting mechanisms. To pursue reforms more effectively, it is essential that the 
government builds on existing achievements, ensures cross-party support for reforms, and 
decentralises the decision-making process by delegating more responsabilities to the line 
ministries. Kosovo should use the period without any regular elections to fulfil its obligations 
under the SAA and ERA II.   
In August 2021, the government adopted an Action Plan to implement the second phase of the 
ERA, which was subsequently endorsed by the Assembly in October 2021. In March 2022, the 
government approved the NIPSAA for the period 2022-2026, which was endorsed by the 
Assembly in April 2022.  
During the reporting period, the government made efforts to further strengthen the inter-
institutional coordination of EU-related affairs. The Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) 
coordinates and monitors the EU integration process through the First Deputy Prime Minister for 
European Integration, Dialogue and Development, as the highest-level political appointee in 
charge of this process, and the Office of Coordination of the Stabilisation and Association 
process. Although inter-institutional coordination structures for the European integration process 
are in place, coordination between line Ministries faces challenges.  
In early 2022, Kosovo prepared a detailed calendar of activities relating to the implementation of 
SAA and ERA II to set a clear timeline to fulfil the commitments. More efforts are expected to 
increase the trust, and in turn, to strengthen coordination between the political and technical-
level staff. Coordination, planning and monitoring of donor assistance, as well as project 
preparation, needs to be further strengthened for Kosovo to benefit from opportunities under the 
Instrument for pre-Accession and the EU Economic and Investment Plan.  
As regards local government, disparities between municipalities in their performance and 
delivery of services continued. Kosovo legislated for the decentralisation of a set of social 
welfare and social protection competences, but municipalities have still not received funding for 
the implementation of these services. Moreover, municipalities have a very low own-source 
revenue base and there is room for improved collection of property taxes in particular. Municipal 
fiscal autonomy and accountability could also be improved with increasing the size of the 
general grant or introducing revenue-sharing mechanisms. In terms of governance, municipal 
assemblies do not play a strong oversight function over the municipal executive.  
Civil society 
Overall, civil society continues to operate in an enabling environment. Cooperation with the 
government needs to improve further through a higher level of engagement and transparency. 
Efforts remain necessary to enhance the transparency of public funding for civil society 
organisations (CSOs), as well as to ensure that legal requirements stemming from the Law on the 
Prevention of Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing do not put undue limitations on the 
financial viability of low-risk CSOs.  
 
11 
 
An empowered civil society is a key component of any democratic system and continues to be 
recognised as such by public institutions.   
Civil society in Kosovo continues to foster democracy and pluralism, participating in decision 
making processes, monitoring policies and promoting good governance and social progress.  
They also actively contribute to the design, implementation and monitoring of EU-related 
reforms, and regularly participate in the policy dialogue platfom foreseen by the Stabilisation and 
Association Agreement (SAA). Civil society organisations are generally free to exercise their 
rights of association, assembly and to critically express their views without undue pressure from 
public authorities, including those promoting civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights.  
Limited progress has been achieved with the implementation of the strategy for cooperation with 
civil society 2019-2023. The Government Council for Cooperation with Civil Society met only 
once in 2021. The work of the Council needs to become more effective and accessible, including 
through the regular publication of key activities.  
Public consultations are organised by central-level institutions. The online platform the 
government uses for this purpose has been improved with features allowing visualisation of key 
statistics. At municipal level, the number of online consultations has slightly increased but it 
remains significantly lower than those organised at a central level by relevant ministries.  Public 
participation in the legislative process is still limited and inputs provided by civil society are not 
systematically reflected in public consultation reports. 
Public funding for non-profit organisations is reported annually and made publicly accessible 
through an online database. The government appointed public funds coordinators in each public 
central institution with the aim of boosting the effectiveness of the process. The regulation on 
public funding to NGOs requires regular monitoring and follow up by the Ministry of Finance. 
The existing platform for public financing of CSOs has been upgraded, but public officials have 
limited capacity to implement public calls. A technical working group was created to review the 
current regulation.  
An updated sectoral risk assessment of the civil society sector remains necessary in order to 
allow for a flexible approach to lower-risk CSOs. No progress was noted regarding the 
implementation of the 2019 Law on Freedom of Association that would ease organisations’ 
registration process. 
The environment for volunteering needs to be improved, including by putting in place an 
appropriate legislative framework, aligned with international standards, as well as allocating 
financial and human resources for youth volunteering programmes.  
2.1.2 Public administration reform 
Kosovo remains at some level of preparation and made limited progress in public 
administration reform (PAR). Notably, some key positive steps were taken by developing 
overarching strategies on PAR and public finance management (PFM) 2022-2026, while 
maintaining the implementation of PFM strategy on track, adopting the law on the first wave of 
streamlining of agencies and launching the development of a draft salary law that needs to be 
finalised and adopted. While the legislative framework on various aspects of PAR is partially in 
place, progress is lacking as regards implementation. Following the 2019 rulings of the 
Constitutional Court, ongoing amendments to the Law on Public Officials need to be aligned 
with PAR principles prior to adoption. The delay in implementing the Law on Public Officials 
 
12 
 
has undermined the organisation of centralised recruitments. The finalisation of job 
classifications and the systematisation of positions have been slow, and this has created 
significant discrepancies in administrative capacity. Insufficient implementation of the Law on 
the Organisation and Functioning of the State Administration and Independent Agencies 
(LOFSAIA) has led to an unsatisfactory level of improvement in the administration’s 
performance and accountability. The process of streamlining agencies has been delayed and, to 
be successful, needs clearer leadership and strengthened capacities to ensure the delivery of 
quality results. Strengthening capacities in the Ministry of Internal Affairs, to ensure effective 
implementation of the Law on General Administrative Procedures, is also required.  
As last year’s recommendations have not been sufficiently implemented, they remain broadly 
valid. In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular: 
→ improve the functioning of the civil service by expediting the implementation of the Law on 
Public Officials in line with the relevant Constitutional Court ruling and with PAR principles, 
while organising centralised recruitments; 
→ develop a coherent wage scheme in line with the principles of merit, fairness and equal 
treatment in the civil service, while finalising the internal organisation of the ministries, by 
putting in place job classifications and job systematisation in the civil service, which are  
enabling conditions for a coherent wage scheme; 
→ improve the legal certainty and reduce the administrative burden of the public administration 
towards businesses and citizens, by implementing the Administrative Prevention and Burden 
Reduction Programme and the Law on General Administrative Procedures; 
→ improve accountability in the public sector by: (1) effectively implementing the Law on 
Organisation and Functioning of the State Administration and Independent Agencies and (2)  
expediting the ongoing streamlining of agencies by setting up a steering body and adopting a 
revised action plan for rationalisation. 
Strategic framework for public administration reform 
A new overarching public administration reform (PAR) strategy is under preparation, merging 
the previous public administration reform strategies on modernisation of the public 
administration, on policy planning and coordination and on better regulation into one umbrella 
framework. The Public Administration Modernisation Strategy 2015-2020 expired, but its action 
plan continued to be implemented in 2021 with an improved but still relatively low 
implementation rate (37%) in the reporting period. A new monitoring platform is being prepared, 
to enhance implementation of the strategic indicators and targets and to provide transparent 
information on progress to the public. Monitoring of reforms has not been systematic as PAR 
and public finance management (PFM) annual and bi-annual reports for the year 2021 have not 
been approved. The Ministerial Council on PAR is in charge of internal coordination of the PAR 
strategic framework at the political level, but more political support is needed in order to make 
this a functioning body and provide regular monitoring and reporting on PAR. At the technical 
level, the Ministry of Internal Affairs is in the lead, but its limited capacities prevent it from 
effectively supervising and leading PAR. A functional analysis of the Ministry has been prepared 
to serve as a basis for a regulation on its organisational structure. 
Policy development and coordination 
 
13 
 
As regards policy-making, Kosovo made some progress on further building some foundations 
for strategic planning. It developed a strategic management framework that, once implemented, 
should (i) provide a clear hierarchy of objectives; (ii) improve performance measurement with 
clear targets linked to the medium-term policy planning and budgeting framework and increase 
managerial accountability. The National Development Strategy 2022-2030 (NDS) is still being 
developed. Maintaining the hierarchy between priorities of this strategy and sectoral ones 
requires political support across line ministries. Budgeting and policy planning need to be better 
integrated, by linking overall policy planning and sectoral strategies’ objectives and  medium-
term expenditure framework (MTEF) and budget documents. The capacities of the Strategic 
Planning Office, under the Office of the Prime Minister, responsible for overall coordination of 
planning, monitoring and reporting and for regulatory impact assessments, need to be further 
strengthened. 
Limited progress was made in further strengthening inclusive and evidence-based policy and 
legislative development. Upgraded administrative capacities are needed, in the Office of the 
Prime Minister, to ensure quality control of regulatory and budget impact assessments and of 
public consultations. The capacity of line ministries also needs to improve in order to increase 
the use of these tools for policy making and to make the conduct of public consultation and 
regulatory impact assessments more effective. Public consultations on various draft legislation 
are organised very late in the process and inputs provided by civil society are not systematically 
reflected. The government should ensure that the legislative process complies with principles and 
standards on legislative drafting, including by systematically issuing concept documents as a 
basis for reform. 
Public finance management 
A new public finance management (PFM) reform strategy (2022-2026), including public 
procurement and public internal financial control, has been drafted but not yet adopted. 
Reporting on the 2021 transitional action plan was delayed.  Despite the negative effects of the 
pandemic, the implementation rate of the 2017-2021 PFM strategy has remained on track, 
maintaining the pace of reform albeit better in some areas than others. Building on this, the focus 
now needs to be on two main elements: strengthening fiscal discipline, notably by improving 
revenue collection and tax compliance in line with international standards as well as improving 
the accuracy and credibility of budget planning and execution annually and in the medium-term. 
Improving public investment management will be key in this respect as well as ensuring 
coherence between the medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) and the national 
development strategy (NDS) 2030, as well as between the MTEF and sectoral strategies. Overall, 
the Ministry of Finance, Labour and Transfers should improve ownership of the new PFM 
strategy and new organic public finance management law, not least as they affect the 
implementation of the Economic Reform Programme for 2022-2024.  
In the area of public procurement, expansion of the e-procurement modules progressed and 
increased linkages between this system and the Kosovan financial management information 
system support commitment control and proper budget implementation. 
As regards budget transparency, citizen-friendly budgets continued to be published but updated 
information on budget implementation is no longer available on the fiscal transparency portal. 
(See also chapters on public procurement, taxation, customs and financial control)  
Public service and human resource management 
 
14 
 
The Law on Public Officials (LPO), adopted in 2020, determines the scope of the civil service 
and the legal basis for merit-based recruitment, promotion and dismissal.  However, the 
Constitutional Court ruled in 2019 that the current LPO was partly unconstitutional. The draft 
amendments to the law are broader than requested in the ruling, and need to be aligned with 
merit principles prior to adoption. Irrespective of such amendments, implementation of the 
current LPO, has been seriously delayed, causing various constraints and gaps in administrative 
capacities across the public administration. This is due to the Ministry of Internal Affairs’ (MIA) 
poor ability to steer those processes and organise centralised recruitment for entry positions. An 
annual recruitment plan has yet to be adopted. 
The MIA is in charge of implementing the human resources management (HRM) policy 
throughout the public administration, but its capacities are insufficient to effectively steer public 
administration reform. Each institution, at both central and local level, has human resources 
management units, but capacities need to be upgraded. While an information system for human 
resources management (HRMIS) is functional, but relevant civil service data is lacking, which 
hampers reporting on the implementation of LPO and coordination of HRM between central and 
local level and it reduces public transparency. The functioning of the Independent Body for 
Oversight and Civil Service needs to be ensured, and its capacities improved to better monitor 
and supervise efficiently civil service procedures and deal with appeals. Kosovo should 
strengthen the human resource management system by improving job classification and 
standardisation of positions and by creating an interconnection with the electronic payroll 
system. Compliance of appointments and dismissals of civil servants with the formal 
procedures laid down in the LPO still needs to be improved and a consistent rule-based system of 
selection and merit–based recruitment must be ensured in practice. The representation of non- 
majority communities in the central administration, as well as the number of women in senior 
positions, remains insufficient.  
The legal basis of the remuneration system remains fragmented, resulting in a system that fails 
to ensure the principles of transparency, merit and equal treatment. Such fragmentation 
contributes to significant differences in the basic salary for equal positions in public institutions. 
Following the ruling of the Constitutional Court, a new draft Law on Salaries is currently being 
developed and should address unfair salary structures, abuse of allowances and discretionary 
decision-making. However, before adopting a new wage scheme, key reforms on civil service 
and human resource management need to be done in parallel, in order to ensure a fair and 
transparent system of equal pay for equal qualifications in the civil service. Those reforms entail 
finalising the internal organisation of ministries, including definition of job classifications in line 
with the Law on Public officials and finalising job systematisation. The situation is aggravated 
by the lack of data, such as an official analysis of civil service salaries. 
There is no systematic approach to the professional development of civil servants. The Kosovo 
Institute for Public Administration, which provides training for civil servants, is largely 
dependent on donor support. The LPO lays down rules and criteria for the development of civil 
servants, including performance appraisal, mobility and promotion. However, those provisions 
are not implemented in practice and an effective performance management system still needs to 
be put in place.  
Integrity plans to promote integrity in the public service exist, but implementation remains 
limited. Implementation of the Law on protection of whistle-blowers has started and related 
crucial secondary legislation developed.  However, whistle-blowing mechanisms and protection 
 
15 
 
requirements still need to be strengthened and effectively implemented. Reports on disciplinary 
measures against civil servants are published regularly. (See section on the fight against 
corruption) 
Accountability of the administration 
The Law on the organisation and functioning of state administration and independent agencies 
(LOFSAIA), covering performance and accountability, is not sufficiently implemented.  The 
rationalisation process is delayed because the review of agencies was not done by the end of the 
transitional period provided for in the law.  Generally, reviews of restructuring agencies and 
establishing new ones, in line with LOFSAIA standards, remain limited due to the weak 
capacities of the Ministry of Internal Affairs to control the quality of these processes. Although 
the Assembly adopted the Law on the first wave of rationalisation in agencies, there is no 
strategic and comprehensive approach to steer and monitor the delivery of quality results. 
Consequently, the lines of accountability in public administration remain blurred, with too many 
independent agencies sharing executive functions and reporting to the Assembly and many 
subordinated agencies reporting, inefficiently, to line ministries. The government should take 
forward the rationalisation process more strategically, by reviewing the action plan on 
rationalisation of agencies, setting up an inter-governmental working body to steer and upgrade 
oversight capacities to monitor the process and by providing more guidance - developing the 
related LOFSAIA methodological framework - to line ministries. In addition, reforming 
delegation chains in the civil service is key to establishing a system in line with principles of 
managerial accountability: Rules are needed on the financial and administrative aspects of 
delegating managerial responsibilities, and middle and high-level managers need to be 
empowered to take decisions (See Chapter 32). 
Public scrutiny of the work of government is still limited. The Assembly’s oversight of the 
government must be strengthened, and a more systematic review of the Assembly’s bills by the 
government must be put in place. Efficient implementation of the Law on access to public 
documents remains a challenge. Despite the appointment of a new Commissioner for 
Information and Privacy, he does not have enough supervisory powers to ensure an independent 
appeal mechanism if public bodies deny or ignore requests. Public bodies continue to not 
proactively disclose, on their websites, annual plans, reports, budgets and financial plans. 
The Kosovo National Audit Office and the Ombudsperson are the key institutions ensuring 
citizens’ right to good administration. However, their recommendations are not always 
efficiently implemented by public bodies. The judiciary needs to increase its efficiency in 
handling administrative disputes to ensure citizens’ rights and access to administrative justice. 
The Basic Court of Pristina still struggles with a large backlog of administrative cases, with 
many incoming minor offence cases. Fragmented legislation affects the liability of public 
authorities in cases of wrongdoing and the right to seek compensation.  
Service delivery to citizen and businesses 
The government has been addressing reforms in this area in a piecemeal manner, through 
progress in individual institutions, rather than comprehensively transforming service delivery. 
Implementation of the Law on general administrative procedures has been slow. The 
Administrative Burden Prevention and Reduction Programme 2022-2027, still to be adopted, 
aims to provide a more comprehensive approach, by both reducing administrative requirements 
for permits and licenses, by means of legislative simplification and digitalisation, and ensuring 
 
16 
 
better compliance with the Law on General Administrative Procedures (LGAP). Services are 
also available to citizens and businesses through the e-Kosova digital portal, but this does not 
address issues with over-the-counter service delivery. Data quality and reliability remain a 
challenge; the Ministry of Internal Affairs is responsible institution for service delivery but lacks 
a specialised unit to manage and monitor public service delivery policy. Service delivery to 
groups in socially vulnerable situations, including persons with disabilities, remains inefficient.  
Chapter 23 - Judiciary and fundamental rights 
The EU’s founding values include the rule of law and respect for human rights. An effective 
(independent, high-quality and efficient) judicial system and an effective fight against corruption 
are of paramount importance, as is the respect for fundamental rights in law and in practice.  
Kosovo is at an early stage in/has some level of preparation for applying the EU acquis and 
the European standards in the area of the judiciary and fundamental rights. Limited progress 
was made, including some progress on the functioning of the judiciary and on investigation and 
prosecution in certain organised crime and high-level corruption cases. The capacity of the 
judiciary and prosecution, including for handling cases in a timely manner, remains weak. On 
fundamental rights, the government needs to: (i) ensure oversight of the legislation’s 
implementation; (ii) streamline strategies; and (iii) better coordinate policies. 
Functioning of the judiciary 
Kosovo is at an early stage in developing a well-functioning judicial system. The overall 
administration of justice continues to be slow, inefficient and vulnerable to undue influence. 
During the reporting period, some progress was achieved. Steps were taken to start 
implementing the rule of law strategy and action plan and initiating the reform of the legislative 
framework governing the prosecutorial system by amending the Law on the Kosovo 
Prosecutorial Council. Kosovo completed the roll-out of an electronic Case Management 
Information System across all courts and prosecution offices and continued to strengthen the 
central criminal records system, although challenges remain. Kosovo made efforts to implement 
the Law on Mediation. The Kosovo Judicial Council adopted a protocol to ensure a more 
effective and efficient implementation of mediation services, and each prosecution office 
throughout Kosovo has officials handling mediation cases. The government has adopted a 
concept document setting out its proposal to carry out a comprehensive vetting of judges and 
prosecutors. A comprehensive approach to justice reform, which is based on a holistic view of 
the gaps and weaknesses of the judicial system, is necessary to ensure long-term impact. Justice 
reform should be addressed first and foremost by improving the implementation of existing tools 
to safeguard the integrity, the independence and the efficiency of the judicial system, including 
through appropriate legislative changes. These mechanisms include, among other things, an 
asset-declaration system, disciplinary procedures and consistent performance evaluation, in line 
with the recommendations of the Venice Commission Opinion of 17 June 2022 on the concept 
document on vetting and relevant European standards. The government has stated its 
commitment to follow the Venice Commission’s recommendations on justice reform and to 
cooperate with the EU.  
In the coming year, Kosovo should in particular: 
→ improve the integrity and professionalism in the judicial system by improving the existing 
tools (asset declaration system, disciplinary proceedings, performance evaluations and