3 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1.  
CONTEXT 
Accession negotiations with Montenegro were opened in June 2012. To date, 33 negotiating 
chapters have been opened, of which three have been provisionally closed. Montenegro 
accepted the revised enlargement methodology focusing on: fundamental reforms, stronger 
political steer, increased dynamism and predictability of the process. Montenegro continued 
to broadly implement the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) and meetings of 
the joint bodies under the agreement took place at regular intervals.  
Overall progress in the accession negotiations depends on progress in the area of rule of law, 
in line with the requirements set out in the Negotiating Framework as well as the revised 
methodology formally accepted by Montenegro at the Intergovernmental Conference held on 
22 June 2021. Progress towards meeting the interim benchmarks set in the rule of law 
Chapters 23 and 24 will be key to achieve further progress in the negotiations overall. No 
further chapters will be provisionally closed before this milestone is reached.  
The political commitment of the Montenegrin authorities to the strategic goal of European 
integration has been consistently stated as the key priority for the country. However, progress 
on EU accession reforms has largely stalled as Montenegro suffered from deep polarisation 
and political instability. The country was ruled by a caretaker government and while 
Parliament was unable to assemble a consistent majority. The absence of a functional 
Constitutional Court created uncertainties and legal discrepancies, including on the electoral 
processes. The presidential election run-off and parliamentary elections took place in April 
and June respectively. The constitution of the new parliament and the new government took 
place at the end of October 2023. Local elections took place in 14 municipalities. 
The EU continued to provide essential and unparalleled technical and financial support. To 
address the energy crisis provoked by Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, 
Montenegro and the Commission prepared an Energy Support Package, consisting of a 
focused national energy action plan and an immediate budget support programme providing 
EUR 30 million of grant financing to Montenegro. The EU also made available EUR 500 
million to the region under the Western Balkans Investment Framework to respond to the 
crisis in the medium term.  
1.2.  
SUMMARY OF THE REPORT1 
Concerning political criteria, the reporting period was marked by tense and confrontational 
positions leading to a blockage of the political system.  
The political situation was dominated by a caretaker government that did not have the 
confidence of the Parliament and a Parliament unable to assemble a clear and consistent 
 
1 This report covers the period from June 2022 to June 2023. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from the government of Montenegro, the EU Member States, European Parliament 
reports and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. This also includes the 
results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule 
of law.  
For the state of play the report uses the following assessment scales: early stage, some level of preparation, 
moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. For progress made during the reporting 
period, the following scale has been used: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, good 
progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, also interim steps have been used. 
 
 
4 
 
majority to take forward reforms. Moreover, the boycott by large sections of the Parliament 
affected its work.   
There was no effective political dialogue and constructive engagement by political parties 
with a view to enhancing parliamentary accountability and government oversight. There was 
a lack of direction on EU accession issues, in particular following the resignation of the 
Minister of EU Affairs. On several occasions, the Government and/or the Parliament chose to 
ignore recommendations of the European Commission and/or the Venice Commission. 
Adoption of the Act on Parliament that would regulate relations between the Parliament and 
the executive is pending.  
Local elections in 14 municipalities (October 2022), presidential elections (March/April 
2023) and parliamentary elections (June 2023) took place. The constitution of the new 
parliament and the new government took place at the end of October 2023.  Election 
observation missions of the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the 
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe monitored the presidential and 
parliamentary elections. These missions assessed both elections as peaceful and competitive 
despite some procedural shortcomings. The mandate of the Parliamentary Committee for a 
comprehensive electoral reform expired in July 2022 with no tangible results. The legal 
framework requires a comprehensive reform and harmonisation of election legislation, voting 
and candidacy rights, transparency, mechanisms of dispute resolution, and oversight of 
campaign finance and media. These, along with other issues, remain unaddressed. The 
absence of a functional Constitutional Court between September 2022 and February 2023 
seriously affected electoral processes. 
As regards governance, the government has carried out its duties in a caretaker capacity since 
August 2022 and with limited accountability, due to the inability of the political system to 
form a new government or proceed to early elections. Against the background of unclear rules 
governing the competences of a caretaker government, the government continued to adopt 
important decisions, and to dismiss and appoint key officials. Key positions continued to be 
filled on an acting basis. The lack of ministerial coordination remains a cause for concern. In 
February 2023, the caretaker government adopted its Annual Work Programme for 2023. 
Overall, transparency of governance remained an issue and the government frequently 
resorted to the procedural option of adopting decisions without formally holding a 
government session. Both Presidents in function during the reporting period refused to sign 
legislation adopted following the dissolution of the Parliament.  
The role of civil society is recognised and promoted. However, the legal and institutional 
framework regulating cooperation between state institutions and civil society needs to be 
improved. Politicians – including at the highest level – frequently denigrated the work of civil 
society organisations and isolated cases of verbal attacks were reported. The Council for Co-
operation of State Bodies and Non-Governmental Organisations has not resumed its work.  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of public administration reform. Overall, 
limited progress was made. A new public finance management reform programme was 
adopted and its implementation was started. By contrast, no changes were made to 
amendments to the civil service legislation that introduced relaxed qualification requirements 
and ample discretion for appointing authorities to dismiss heads of administrative bodies. The 
Parliament adopted amendments to the Law on local self-government to harmonise it with the 
Law on civil service, disregarding the Commission’s recommendation. The relaxed 
requirements are a source of continuing concern for merit-based recruitment, competence and 
independence of civil servants. Continued staff changes in the public administration led to 
further loss of know-how on matters related to the EU accession process and an overall 
 
5 
 
slowing of the pace of reforms. The Parliament has yet to adopt amendments to the Law on 
access to information. Effective lines of accountability within the administration are still to be 
set up. 
Montenegro remains moderately prepared to apply the EU acquis and European standards in 
the area of judiciary and fundamental rights but made limited progress overall. No progress 
was achieved in justice reform, the most challenging area of the rule of law to date. The 
judicial system continued to face a deep institutional crisis, resulting in weak leadership and 
management, lack of strategic vision and poor planning, affecting the country’s ability to 
deliver justice. In addition, the system remains affected by issues of accountability, among 
other weaknesses. Montenegro continues to meet its obligations on fundamental rights under 
international human rights instruments and legislation. The Law on the Judicial Council and 
judges and the Law on State Prosecution Service remain to be amended in line with the EU 
acquis and European standards. Full and effective protection of journalists and other media 
workers continues to improve, yet tangible results on old cases of attacks have yet to be 
achieved. 
Montenegro has achieved some level of preparation in the fight against corruption. Limited 
progress was achieved. Corruption, including high-level corruption, remains an issue of 
concern and is prevalent in many areas, including in state structures. Montenegro has not 
sufficiently upgraded its legislative and strategic framework for the prevention of and fight 
against corruption in line with the EU acquis, European and international standards. Several 
high-profile cases of corruption are under investigation. Montenegro still needs to 
demonstrate a stringent and unambiguous criminal justice response to this critical 
phenomenon. Limited progress was achieved in preventing corruption. The results of the 
Anti-Corruption Agency improved in quantitative terms. However, its independence, 
accountability, impartiality, and proactiveness should be further ensured. The Law on 
prevention of corruption should be improved.  
As regards the fight against organised crime and high-level corruption, the Special 
Prosecution Office acted with alacrity in launching several high-profile investigations, that 
appear to point to a deep infiltration of corruption and organised crime into state structures, 
including at the top level of the judiciary and law enforcement. The justice system of 
Montenegro needs to demonstrate a strong, stringent, coherent and unambiguous response. 
Montenegro must further improve the track record of investigations, prosecutions, final 
verdicts and asset confiscation in the fight against organised crime and high-level corruption. 
A more deterrent and effective criminal sanctioning policy and criminal justice response 
needs to be enforced to avoid the perception of impunity. The effective and systematic use of 
financial investigations and asset seizure and confiscation needs to be improved. Efforts in 
this policy area should primarily target those sectors that are most vulnerable to corruption. 
In the area of fundamental rights, the legislative and institutional framework is largely in 
place and Montenegro continues to largely meet its international obligations on human rights. 
However, additional efforts are needed to fully implement this framework. Changes to the 
existing legislation are also needed, in particular in the area of non-discrimination. The 
reporting period continued to be marked by polarisation and division. The most vulnerable 
groups in society (including Roma2 and Egyptians, persons with disabilities, LGBTIQ 
persons) continued to be subjected to discrimination, hate speech and hate crime. The trend of 
 
2 In line with the terminology of European institutions the umbrella term ‘Roma’ is used here to refer to a 
number of different groups, without denying the specificities of these groups. 
 
6 
 
increase in the number of femicides with insufficient follow-up by the authorities and cases of 
publicly expressed misogyny, gender-based violence and violence against children remains an 
issue of serious concern. Additional efforts need to be made to ensure effective 
implementation of legislation, access to justice, and enforcement of rights in administrative 
and judicial proceedings, in particular for vulnerable groups. Montenegro must step up its 
efforts to conduct efficient, effective and independent investigations to address police torture, 
violations, and illegal use of coercive measures. 
Montenegro has a pluralistic and diverse media landscape and has some level of preparation 
in the area of freedom of expression. Overall, limited progress was achieved. In general, the 
authorities provided prompt and effective law-enforcement and institutional responses to new 
cases of violence against journalists. However, there was no effective judicial follow-up of 
old cases. The government involved civil society and media stakeholders in the drafting of 
new media legislation but failed to finalise the legislative proposals and present them to the 
Parliament. The authorities need to step up efforts to effectively address the pending 
recommendations of the ad hoc commission for monitoring violence against the media, 
particularly regarding important old cases. The RTCG, the national public broadcaster, 
continued to produce politically balanced content, including during election periods. Further 
sustained efforts are needed to meet the highest standards of media integrity and 
accountability, counter disinformation, and limit the effects of online harassment and hate 
speech. The media environment remains highly politically polarised, with uneven application 
of the journalistic Code of Ethics and professional standards. Credible and effective self-
regulation mechanisms need to be set up to strengthen media integrity and professionalism.  
On the economic criteria, Montenegro has made limited progress and is moderately prepared 
in developing a functioning market economy. The economic expansion continued at a robust 
pace in 2022, supported by private consumption and strong growth in tourism. Headwinds 
came from inflationary pressures on the back of higher global commodity prices. The current 
account deficit increased as both exports and imports expanded rapidly. An expansionary 
fiscal policy fuelled domestic demand and contributed to very high net wage growth. The 
budget deficit increased significantly and a comprehensive medium-term consolidation plan to 
address mounting fiscal challenges has not been developed. The labour market situation 
improved, but structural problems persist, including large regional disparities and gender 
gaps, informality and high youth and long-term unemployment. The banking sector remained 
well capitalised and liquid. The number of new businesses increased, but efforts to improve 
the business environment and the governance of state-owned enterprises slowed down due to 
political uncertainty.  
Montenegro has made some progress  and is moderately prepared to cope with competitive 
pressure and market forces within the EU. The education system faces numerous 
challenges, as shown by the results of international tests. Although public financing for 
research and development remains modest, some progress was made in attracting private 
investors. Efforts to advance a green and digital transition have continued, but large 
infrastructure gaps persist, as the administrative and financial capacity to identify, prioritise 
and implement major public investments remains limited, hampering the use of EU support. 
Despite some progress in the metallurgy sector and the good performance of tourism, efforts 
are needed to diversify Montenegro’s narrow production base. The low value added of 
domestic products, the small size of local companies, and their low level of participation in 
exports represent obstacles to increasing the productivity and competitiveness of local firms. 
Montenegro made progress on statistical methodology and transmission of data to Eurostat 
and the strategic framework for financial control. Montenegro should now focus on aligning 
 
7 
 
its statistics with the European System of Accounts and strengthening budget inspection and 
managerial accountability in public administration. Montenegro is moderately prepared / has 
a good level of preparation in the area of public procurement. In 2022, some progress was 
achieved in aligning with the EU acquis and in further improving the functioning of the 
electronic procurement system. In the coming year, Montenegro should focus on the effective 
implementation of legislation on public procurement and public-private partnership. It should 
also fully comply with EU public procurement rules in all cases, such as when awarding the 
concession to operate airports. 
Regarding good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation, Montenegro remained 
committed to promoting good bilateral relations with other enlargement countries and 
neighbouring EU Member States. Montenegro is generally an active participant in regional 
cooperation.  
Concerning Montenegro's ability to assume the obligations of membership, important 
work on alignment and preparation for the implementation of the EU acquis took place in 
many areas, albeit at a much slower pace than anticipated. 
The internal market cluster is key for Montenegro’s preparations to meet the requirements 
of the EU’s internal market and is of high relevance for possible early integration measures 
and the development of the Common Regional Market. Progress was achieved on market 
surveillance, accreditation and standardisation;  intellectual property rights and the adoption 
of a new national comprehensive strategy on intellectual property; State aid transparency; 
banking; and consumer and health protection. Montenegro should now focus on aligning its 
legislation with the EU acquis on standardisation; strengthening the Employment Agency; 
continuing to alignment with the EU Services Directive; enforcing the new postal market 
rules; stepping up progress on developing qualifications for regulated professions; 
accelerating progress on electronic company registration, capital movements and payments, 
including on the acquisition of property rights; adopting a new company law and a corporate 
accounting law; further aligning its legislation with the EU acquis on intellectual property; 
adopting the roadmap concerning the closing benchmarks in the area of competition and State 
aid and further progress on State aid cases including complex ones; ensuring consumer 
protection and health protection; and implementing the laws aligning its legislation with the 
EU acquis in the insurance and capital markets sector.  
The competitiveness and inclusive growth cluster has significant links to Montenegro’s 
Economic Reform Programme. Progress was made on tobacco control, pensions, industrial 
policy, the operationalisation of the Innovation Fund, taxation, and trade facilitation. In the 
area of economic and monetary policy, work to implement the action plan for alignment with 
the EU acquis is ongoing. Montenegro should now focus on independence of the media 
sector and adoption of laws on audiovisual media; alignment with the EU acquis on value 
added tax; coordination of work on economic and monetary issues; labour law and the anti-
discrimination law, safety at work; assessing industrial policy and drafting a new policy, 
research and innovation, education and training and implementing EU-compatible 
computerised transit system. 
The green agenda and sustainable connectivity cluster has significant links to 
Montenegro’s Economic Reform Programme, the Commission’s Economic and Investment 
Plan and the Green Agenda for the Western Balkans. Progress was made in creating a day-
ahead energy market and on port state control, but progress was limited concerning 
environment and climate change. Montenegro should now focus on the strategy for green 
transition in the energy sector, including just transition plans for a phase-out of the power 
plant in Pljevlja; adoption and implementation of the railway law; revision of the Transport 
 
8 
 
Development Strategy and significantly stepping up efforts on waste management, water and 
air quality, nature protection and climate change, including by adopting the National Energy 
and Climate Plan without further delay. 
The resources, agriculture and cohesion cluster comprises policies linked to EU Structural 
funds and Investment funds and developing the capacities to assume the responsibilities of a 
future EU Member State. Progress was made in the area of agriculture and rural development 
through the adoption of a new Strategy, food and fisheries and acquaculture, regional policy 
and structural instruments, financial and budgetary provisions. Montenegro should now focus 
on starting the implementation of the IPARD III programme, accelerate legislative alignment 
in the area of agriculture and rural development as well as fisheries and aquaculture, upgrade 
food-establishments and food safety controls whilst continuing vaccination plans for rabies as 
needed; EU cohesion policy requirements building capacity for the handling of Instrument for 
Pre-accession Assistance programmes under indirect management; and rules of 
administration for the own resources system.  
In the external relations cluster, Montenegro continued to fully align with all EU common 
foreign and security policy (CFSP) positions, declarations and common positions, including 
sanctions. It also continued to implement measures under the Common Regional Market 
based on EU rules, including by cooperating under the Central European Free Trade 
Agreement (CEFTA) and the Regional Cooperation Council.  
Strengthening the administrative capacity to apply the EU acquis remains an important 
challenge for Montenegro, including the urgent need to re-stabilise a functional negotiating 
structure.  
In the area of migration, legal labour migration to Montenegro continued to increase. In 
2022, 29 319 temporary residence and work permits were issued, mainly for seasonal 
workers. In 2022, 8 519 migrants were registered who had crossed the border illegally, a 
twofold increase compared with 2021, reflecting regional trends. A total of 8 320 people 
registered an intention to request asylum, but only 175 actually lodged an asylum request and 
9 persons were granted an international protection status. Montenegro continues to host the 
highest number of Ukrainian nationals in the Western Balkans, both in absolute figures and 
proportionally to its population (1%). The EU-Montenegro readmission agreement with EU 
Member States continued to be implemented satisfactorily. Montenegro and the EU signed a 
new status agreement in May 2023, enabling European Border and Coast Guard Agency 
(Frontex) deployments anywhere on the territory of Montenegro. Steps were taken to further 
align Montenegro’s visa policy with the one of the EU, although further efforts are needed in 
this regard. Montenegro must continue its efforts to cope with migratory pressure, by 
developing its international cooperation on readmission, raising its capacity to prosecute 
migrant smuggling networks; and setting up a modern migrant data collection system. The 
economic citizenship scheme was. The investor citizenship scheme was phased out at the end 
of 2022.  
 
 
 
9 
 
1.3 STATE OF PLAY OF THE ACCESSION NEGOTIATIONS  
CLUSTERS 
Chapters / areas  
Date chapter opened / closed with 
interim or closing benchmarks   
Fundamentals 
 
All chapters open 
23-Judiciary and fundamental rights  
24-Justice, freedom, security  
  5-Public Procurement  
18-Statistics  
32-Financial control 
…Economic Criteria 
…Functioning of democratic Institutions  
…PAR 
December 2013  
December 2013  
December 2013  
December 2014 
June 2014  
 
- 
- 
Internal Market 
 
All chapters open 
 1-Free movement of goods   
 2-Freedom of movement for workers   
 3-Right of establishment and freedom 
to establish services  
 4-Free movement of capital 
 6-Company Law  
 7-Intellectual property rights 
 8-Competition  
 9-Financial services  
28-Consumer and health protection 
June 2017  
December 2017  
December 2017  
… 
June 2014  
December 2013  
March 2014  
June 2020  
June 2015  
December 2014   
Competitiveness and 
inclusive growth 
 
 
All chapters open  
ch.25  and 26 
provisionally closed 
10-Information society and media  
16-Taxation 
17-Economic and monetary policy 
19-Social policy and employment  
20-Enterprise and industrial policy  
25-Science and research 
  
26-Education and culture 
  
29-Customs union  
March 2014  
March 2015  
June 2018  
December 2016  
December 2013  
December 2012 (opened and closed - 
no closing benchmarks);  
April 2013  (opened and closed – no 
closing benchmarks) 
December 2014   
Green Agenda and 
Sustainable 
connectivity 
All chapters open 
14- Transport policy 
15- Energy 
21-Trans-European Networks 
27-Environment and climate change  
December 2015  
December 2015  
June 2015  
December 2018  
Resources, 
Agriculture and 
cohesion 
 
All chapters open  
 
11-Agriculture and rural development  
12-Food safety, veterinary, 
phytosanitary services 
13- Fisheries and acquaculture 
22-Regional policy and coordination of  
      structural instruments  
33-Financial and budgetary provisions  
December 2016  
 
June 2016  
June 2016  
 
June 2017  
December 2014  
External Relations 
Both chapters open 
ch.30 provisionally 
closed  
30-External relations  
31- Foreign, security & defence policy  
March 2015 – June 2017 provisionally 
closed 
June 2014