1.1. CONTEXT 
Accession negotiations with Montenegro were opened in June 2012. To date, all 33 
negotiating chapters have been opened, of which seven have been provisionally closed. The 
June 2024 milestone of setting the closing benchmarks for Chapters 23 and 24 opened a 
new phase in the accession negotiations. Since then, Montenegro has successfully 
progressed with provisionally closing further negotiating chapters in intergovernmental 
conferences in December 2024 (Chapters 7, 10 and 20) and June 2025 (Chapter 5). 
These steps forward in the EU accession negotiations reflect the political commitment of the 
Montenegrin authorities to the strategic goal of European integration, which has been 
consistently stated as the key priority for the country. The government has been operating 
and delivering in an overall stable environment, despite a large ministerial composition and a 
coalition of diverse parties. The institutions in charge of the EU integration process are in 
place. Montenegro maintained its focus on the EU integration agenda, although the 
legislative EU alignment process for certain negotiation chapters slowed in early 2025 due to 
domestic political challenges. 
Parliament can exercise its powers, including control of the executive and involvement in the 
legislative process, in an overall effective way. Montenegro and its democratic institutions 
remain fragile and vulnerable to political crisis and potential institutional blockages. 
Bipartisan legislation reformed some aspects of the electoral framework, however further 
revision is needed to fully align it with Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe 
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODHIR) recommendations. 
Montenegro continued to broadly implement the Stabilisation and Association Agreement, 
(SAA) and meetings of the joint bodies under the agreement took place at regular intervals. 
Montenegro has actively engaged and started to deliver on the implementation of the Growth 
Plan for the Western Balkans across its four pillars of gradual integration with the EU single 
market, regional economic integration, fundamental reforms and increased financial support. 
Under the Reform and Growth Facility2, a performance-based EU instrument supporting the 
EU accession process, the country adopted its Reform Agenda, which covers reforms in the 
areas of: (i) governance, public administration reform and public financial management; (ii) 
the green and digital transitions; (iii) human capital; (iv) private-sector development and 
business environment; and (v) fundamental rights and the rule of law. 
The Commission’s 2025 rule of law report3 covered Montenegro for the second time. 
 
1 This report covers the period from 1 September 2024 to 1 September 2025. It is based on input from 
a variety of sources, including contributions from the government of Montenegro, EU Member States, 
European Parliament reports and information from various international and non-governmental 
organisations. It also includes the results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other 
stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of law. 
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level 
of preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe 
progress made during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, 
limited progress, some progress, good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim 
steps have also been used. 
2OJ L, 2024/1449, 24.5.2024. 
3 COM(2025) 900 final. 
 
4

* * *

1.2 
MAIN FINDINGS OF THE REPORT 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
Democracy 
The general framework provides a basis for the democratic conduct of elections. After a long 
delay, the Parliamentary Committee in charge of developing a comprehensive electoral 
reform adopted in July amendments to the Law on Election of Councillors and Members of 
Parliament, and to the Law on Financing of Political Entities and Election Campaigns. 
However, these amendments were not consulted in substance with relevant stakeholders, 
including the European Commission, and only partially addressed existing recommendations 
from the OSCE/ODIHR and GRECO. The legal framework requires further changes, through a 
transparent and inclusive consultation process with all relevant stakeholders, to address all 
existing shortcoming and fully align with the EU acquis and European standards on inclusive, 
transparent and resilient electoral processes.    
Parliament can exercise its powers, including control of the executive and involvement in the 
legislative process, in an overall effective way, although the Prime Minister’s irregular 
appearances before Parliament raised some concerns. At the end of 2024, a serious 
institutional and political crisis emerged over the decision of Parliament to unilaterally 
declare the retirement of a Constitutional Court judge and terminate its mandate, raising 
concerns about respect for the independence of the Constitutional Court and the principle of 
separation of powers enshrined in the Constitution. The crisis stemmed from a lack of clear 
rules on judicial retirement for judges due to conflicting secondary legislation. A political 
agreement was reached with the opposition in mid-March and paved the way for the 
resumption of parliamentary work. The agreement also requested a Venice Commission 
opinion on Parliament’s decision, which was published mid-June. Its recommendations must 
be implemented urgently. Despite these developments, the Parliament’s procedure for 
selecting a replacement of the concerned Constitutional Court judge continued.   
The government has been operating and delivering in an overall stable environment, despite 
a large ministerial composition and a diverse coalition of parties. Nevertheless, governance 
has been suffering from lack of ministerial coordination and overall steering.  
The institutions in charge of the EU integration process are in place. Montenegro maintained 
its focus on the EU integration agenda, although the legislative EU alignment process on 
certain negotiation chapters slowed in early 2025, notably with regards to chapter 23 and 24, 
due to domestic political challenges. The negotiation structure in charge of EU accession 
negotiations generally fulfils its coordination role but would benefit from further 
strengthening and building up its technical expertise. 
Civil society organisations (CSOs) in Montenegro overall operate in an enabling environment. 
The main legal and institutional framework for civil society to operate freely is in place. The 
involvement of civil society in policymaking is formalised, but at times purely formal and not 
consistently taking place. The Council for Cooperation between the government and non-
governmental organisations (NGOs) has still not resumed work. The practice of launching 
calls for proposals to finance NGO projects is not consistently carried out by all ministries. 
Legislative changes are needed to further strengthen CSOs’ involvement on policymaking as 
are efforts to ensure genuine and meaningful cooperation between the government and 
CSOs. 
Public administration reform 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of public administration reform and has 
made  some progress. A new action plan on public administration reform and public 
financial management has been developed and adopted. The regulatory framework for 
 
5 
 
public administration reform still needs to be finalised in the area of free access to 
information and merit-based remuneration. Despite adoption of a new law on civil service in 
July for a more professional civil service, administrative capacities remain weak also due to 
delayed recruitments of open vacancies, high number of acting positions and temporary 
positions. In this regard the government is planning to undertake key steps for the 
optimisation of administrative capacities. In addition, the framework’s implementation has 
not yet led to improved performance and accountability in public administration.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Montenegro needs in particular to:  
→ ensure a more transparent and accountable administration by finalising the internal 
review of line ministries’ organisational set-up and subordinated bodies and adopt the 
Law on free access to information, setting out measures to reduce the high number of 
requests for information and appeals;   
→ strengthen the functioning of a professional, merit-based civil service, by taking key 
steps, such as: (i) implementing the new Law on civil servants and state employees by 
filling regularly vacancies line with merit-based recruitments; (ii) finalising the 
systematisation of job positions based on the newly adopted competence framework; 
and reducing acting positions and temporary contracts (iii) linking job descriptions to 
clear salary schemes for a fair and merit-based remuneration; 
→ improve the credibility and alignment between medium-term and annual budget 
frameworks and considerably strengthen fiscal governance by: (i) adopting the Fiscal 
Policy Guidelines; (ii) making the Fiscal Council operational; (iii) respecting fiscal rules 
when setting fiscal targets; and (iv) laying down a clear institutional set-up for fiscal risk 
management, monitoring and accountability. 
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights 
Montenegro is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in applying the EU 
acquis and European standards in this area and has made some progress overall. After the 
closing benchmarks for Chapter 23 were set, Montenegro started implementation of last 
year’s substantial reforms and improvements to the legislative and strategic frameworks 
across all sectors, which is yielding positive results. In addition, in the area of fundamental 
rights, Montenegro has adopted substantial reforms to the legal framework. 
. 
Functioning of the judiciary 
Montenegro’s judicial system is between a moderate and a good level of preparation and 
has made some progress on the implementation of key judicial reforms. The new President 
of the Supreme Court was unanimously appointed by the Judicial Council through a merit-
based and transparent procedure, while the timely filling of high level judicial and 
prosecutorial positions remains a challenge. Implementation of the previously improved 
legal framework has yielded some initial positive results. The work on implementing the 
2024-2027 Judicial Reform Strategy is ongoing, yet not all planned activities for 2024 have 
been fully implemented. A 30% salary increase for holders of judicial functions has been 
adopted, making an important contribution to the attractiveness of the judicial career 
addressing a longstanding recommendation of the European Commission. Montenegro has 
initiated the process to amend its Constitution addressing some of the recommendations of 
the European Commission. The track record on judicial accountability remains limited. The 
justice system needs to substantially improve capacity in terms of human resources, budget, 
infrastructure and ICT. Furthermore, some positive developments were observed in the area 
of efficiency, while the backlog remains significant. Montenegro continues to make good 
progress in the domestic handling of war crimes.   
 
 
6 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ proceed with appointments to high-level judicial positions through merit-based and 
transparent procedures, including to the Constitutional Court and the Judicial and 
Prosecutorial Councils, to ensure the independence, accountability and proper 
functioning of the justice system;  
→ continue strengthening judicial independence and ensuring full and effective 
implementation of the improved strategic and legal framework and further align the legal 
framework, including the Constitution, in particular on the composition and decision 
making process of the Judicial Council and Prosecutorial Council, with the EU acquis and 
European standards on judicial independence and accountability, irremovability, 
impartiality, integrity, efficiency and professionalism of the judicial system, addressing 
the recommendations from the European Commission, the Venice Commission and the 
Council of Europe Group of States against Corruption (GRECO). 
→ improve the justice system's overall efficiency, including a reduction of the backlog of 
cases across the judiciary and by implementing targeted measures, particularly in the 
High Court of Podgorica, the Administrative Court of Montenegro and the Special State 
Prosecution Office and by ensure full implementation of the Plan for rationalisation of the 
court network and the 2025-2028 Judicial Digitalisation Strategy.  
Fight against corruption 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the fight against corruption. Some progress was 
made on the implementation of reforms. The implementation of the previously improved 
legal framework is ongoing, in particular with the adoption of eight implementing laws. 
Further efforts are needed to ensure full enforcement and alignment with several 
outstanding GRECO, Venice Commission and European Commission recommendations. The 
Agency for the Prevention of Corruption continued to carry out its tasks, despite some 
disruption caused by delays in appointing its management and resource constraints. 
Montenegro must urgently appoint a full-term Director. The implementation of the 2024-2028 
strategy for the fight against corruption and its 2024-2025 action plan is ongoing, but 
challenges remain concerning the monitoring of its implementation. The human resources 
capacities in the fight against corruption need to be increased. The track record on 
investigations and prosecutions in high-level corruption cases continues to improve, but the 
number of final convictions remains low and need to be increased. The lack of effective and 
deterrent penalties continues to contribute to a perception of impunity. Systematic delaying 
practice of criminal proceedings needs to be addressed, in particular in high level corruption 
cases. Measures aiming to tackle corruption in the identified high-risk areas are being 
carried out under the Strategy, and Montenegro must ensure that targeted risk assessments 
and specific actions are effectively and systematically enforced. The legal framework 
regulating political parties and electoral campaigns funding still needs to be further amended 
through a transparent and inclusive consultation process including relevant stakeholders. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ continue the full and effective implementation of the improved strategic and legal 
frameworks to address existing challenges and continue alignment with the EU acquis 
and European standards on the prevention and fight against corruption by following up 
the remaining recommendations from the Venice Commission, GRECO and the European 
Commission peer review missions, including on the effective functioning of the 
 
7 
 
institutional set-up, ensuring the operational capacities and financial independence of the 
Agency for the Prevention of Corruption; 
→ improve the track record on proactive corruption investigations, prosecutions and 
convictions, in particular high-level corruption, by urgently strengthening the effective 
enforcement of existing criminal legislation by the prosecution and courts, including by 
imposing effective and deterrent penalties, adopting legislative amendments on 
obstacles and undue delays in criminal proceedings of high-level corruption cases, 
namely the Criminal Procedure Code and the Law on Attorneys, and improving the follow 
up of State Audit Institution’s opinions and reports; 
→ further amend the Law on financing of political entities and electoral campaigns through 
a transparent and inclusive consultation process including relevant stakeholders, to 
address the existing shortcomings and bring it fully in line with OSCE-ODIHR and 
European standards, to substantially increase transparency and control of political 
parties' spending, and to prevent the abuse of state resources, including through 
dissuasive penalties. 
Fundamental rights 
The legislative and institutional framework for fundamental rights is largely in place, and 
Montenegro continues to largely meet its international obligations on human rights. 
However, more effort is needed to fully implement this framework and to ensure access to 
justice and enforcement of rights in administrative and judicial proceedings, in particular for 
people in vulnerable situations. A new law on the Ombudsperson’s Office is being drafted to 
fully align with the Paris Principles and help secure an upgraded accreditation to ‘A’ status of 
the National Human Rights Institution (NHRI). The Parliament has yet to adopt a new Law on 
anti-discrimination in line with the EU acquis and European standards. The most vulnerable 
groups in society (including Roma4 and Egyptians, persons with disabilities and LGBTIQ 
persons) continued to be subjected to discrimination, hate speech and hate crime. 
Montenegro must effectively address all recommendations from the European Committee 
for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment (CPT), the European 
Commission on Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) and the Group of Experts on Action against 
Violence Against Women and Domestic Violence (GREVIO).  
 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and some 
remain valid. In the coming year, Montenegro needs, in particular, to: 
→ continue making substantial progress in implementing all pending recommendations 
from the CPT, ECRI and GREVIO; 
→ make additional efforts in implementing the Strategy for the Advancement of the Status 
of Roma and Egyptians in Montenegro and meet commitments made under the Poznan 
Declaration; 
→ adopt a new law on anti-discrimination and the new Law on personal data protection, in 
line with the EU acquis and European and international standards. 
 
Freedom of expression 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of freedom of expression. Some progress 
was achieved on the implementation of reforms.  Montenegro continues to uphold a zero-
tolerance policy to violence against journalists. In July, the Parliament appointed three new 
 
4 In line with the terminology of European institutions, the umbrella term ‘Roma’ is used here to refer to a number 
of different groups without denying the unique characteristics of these groups. 
 
8 
 
members of the Council of the Radio Television of Montenegro (RTCG). However, there are 
delays in appointing members to the Council of the Agency for Audiovisual Media Services 
(AMU).  The national media strategy continued to be implemented, and Montenegro 
continues to enjoy a pluralistic media environment and provides adequate legal guarantees 
for the freedom of expression and an enabling environment for the media to operate freely, 
independently and professionally. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented, therefore 
remain largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro needs, in particular, to: 
→ continue providing prompt and effective law enforcement and judicial protection to 
journalists against all forms of violence, while prioritising investigations and judicial 
follow-up in critical cold cases; 
→ continue to consistently implement all media-related legislation and further alignment 
with the EU acquis, ensuring the swift appointment of members to the Council of the 
AMU and that any future amendments to the media legislation, if needed, do not 
undermine the progress achieved so far, particularly on safeguarding the political 
independence of the public broadcaster RTCG and the AMU, including to protect the 
editorial, institutional, and financial independence of these organizations from any form 
of undue influence; 
→ align national media legislation with the European Media Freedom Act. 
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security 
Montenegro is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of justice, 
freedom and security. Limited progress was made, with work starting on the improvement of 
border surveillance equipment, an ongoing recruitment campaign to hire new border police 
officers, and the installation of equipment for the electronic registration of migrants at the 
border police premises in Božaj and Pljevlja. In December 2024, Montenegro granted visa 
exemptions to two additional countries Bahrain: (permanently) and Uzbekistan (seasonally) 
and upgraded the seasonal exemption for Saudi Arabia to a permanent exemption. By adding 
these countries, Montenegro severely regressed on its alignment with the EU’s visa policy. 
However, in October, Montenegro abolished the visa-free regime with four countries: Kuwait, 
Egypt, Armenia, and Uzbekistan. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ increase the efficiency of prosecution/adjudication for serious and organised crime 
cases, especially money laundering cases; address the lengthiness of trials and frequent 
adjournments in organised crime cases; ensure the application of key legal concepts, 
such as stand-alone money laundering (independent of the predicate crime) and quality 
of evidence by courts and prosecution; and ensure the seizure and confiscation of 
criminal assets – by systematically tracking money flows, carrying out special 
investigative measures efficiently and consistently using extended confiscation; 
→ further strengthen border management capacity by addressing critical gaps in border 
surveillance infrastructure and equipment; take the necessary steps to set up an advance 
passenger information (API) system and a biometric migrant registration system; 
→ terminate visa-free agreements with countries that require a visa to enter the EU, in line 
with commitments already made in the Reform Agenda, in particular countries that pose 
irregular migration or security risks to the EU. 
Fight against serious and organised crime 
 
9 
 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the fight against serious and organised crime. Good 
progress was made on the preparation of the new draft law on weapons and the adoption of 
the strategy for the fight against transnational organised crime 2024-2027 and the mid-term 
review of the serious and organised crime threat assessment (SOCTA). In line with the EU 
acquis, in April 2025, the police administration set up the International Operational Room 
24/7 Single Point of Contact (SPOC). 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and 
therefore remain broadly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ make progress in filling vacancies in the Special Police Unit (SPU), Special State 
Prosecutor’s Office (SSPO) and Podgorica High Court, provide suitable premises to SSPO 
and SPU, and reorganise the Special Investigative Measure (SIM) division; 
→ ensure stability in all police sectors and directorates by appointing fully empowered 
heads and directors following an objective and merit-based procedure; 
→ Mitigate the risks of corruption and organised crime infiltration in law enforcement 
agencies and the judiciary by implementing a strong prevention and integrity policy and 
providing a stringent judicial response to detected cases; urgently reorganise the Ministry 
of Interior and the police to strengthen corruption prevention and internal control. 
 
ECONOMIC CRITERIA 
The existence of a functioning market economy 
Montenegro has made some progress and is between a moderate and a good level of 
preparation in developing a functioning market economy. Economic growth slowed down 
amid weaker tourism exports in 2024 and the first half of 2025. The budget deficit increased 
in 2024 but was in line with the revised target; however, fiscal vulnerabilities remain given the 
high debt rollover needs and recent measures that weakened the government’s revenue base 
and raised social spending. The labour market situation continued to improve, but structural 
problems persist, such as high youth and long-term unemployment rates. The banking sector 
remained well capitalised and liquid. Some progress was made in improving the business 
environment and preparing the reform of state-owned enterprises (SOEs). 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were addressed to some extent but 
remain mostly valid. To improve the functioning of the market economy, Montenegro should 
in particular: 
→ design and implement measures that limit public spending and raise revenue, ensuring 
compliance with the fiscal rules; 
→ implement the Law on budget and fiscal responsibility to set up the Fiscal Council in time 
for it to review the 2026 budget proposal;  
→ prepare a comprehensive fiscal risk statement, including the analysis of SOE-related 
fiscal risks, and advance the SOE governance reform. 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the EU 
Montenegro has made some progress and is between a moderate and a good level of 
preparation to cope with competitive pressure and market forces in the EU. The education 
system still faces numerous challenges, which are being gradually addressed by the 
authorities. Efforts to advance the green and digital transitions have continued at a slow 
pace. Further efforts are needed to diversify Montenegro’s narrow production base. The 
economy’s high reliance on services, in particular tourism, together with the small size of 
 
10 
 
local companies and their low level of participation in exports are obstacles to increasing the 
productivity and competitiveness of local firms. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and remain mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ continue implementing digital public services for the public and businesses and prioritise 
the development and implementation of an interactive e-government platform for 
transactional electronic services; 
→ improve the implementation of programmes for dual vocational education and training 
and post-secondary education in close cooperation with business associations and 
provide work-based learning;  
→ improve the institutional and regulatory environment for the green transition and increase 
energy resilience by adopting the national energy and climate plan and implementing 
energy efficiency legislation. 
Chapter 5: Public procurement  
Montenegro has a good level of preparation in the area of public procurement. Good 
progress was achieved. In June, the chapter has been provisionally closed. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were mostly implemented. In the 
coming year Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ amend the Law on public procurement and the Law on prevention of corruption, 
expanding definitions of corruption and fraud in public procurement, strengthening 
corrective mechanisms, direct misdemeanour liability, budgetary inspection controls and 
linking relevant provisions of the two laws; 
→ introduce a ‘red flag’ system in the electronic procurement system for detecting 
irregularities in public procurement procedures (fraud, collusion, coercion, obstruction, 
conflict of interest and other corrupt actions); 
→ ensure that the implementation of intergovernmental agreements with the United Arab 
Emirates and other countries does not contravene or circumvent the EU acquis on public 
procurement. 
Chapter 18: Statistics 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of statistics. Overall, some progress was 
made in implementing the agricultural census and publishing the population and housing 
census.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year Montenegro should, in particular:  
→ start regularly producing, disseminating and transmitting government finance statistics 
and properly completed tables for the excessive deficit procedure to Eurostat;  
→ strengthen the human and financial resources of the Statistical Office of Montenegro 
(MONSTAT) so it can fully carry out its responsibilities and retain expert staff; 
→ increase the production and dissemination of statistics in line with the EU acquis.  
Chapter 32: Financial control 
Montenegro has a good level of preparation in the area of public financial control and 
external audit. Very good progress was made by: (i) adopting a new Law on internal control 
and governance in June and developing related secondary legislation in the area of internal 
 
11 
 
audit methodology; (ii) strengthening internal audits in state-owned enterprises; (iii) adopting 
a national anti-fraud strategy in line with EU recommendations and (iv) adopting in October 
2025 the relevant legislation in full alignment with the EU acquis on the protection of financial 
interests. However, internal audit productivity and effectiveness needs to be improved. 
Effective delegation of administrative and financial authority remains moderate and needs to 
be streamlined across all line ministries. External audit reforms have continued, and the 
country’s audit institutions need to be made fully operational. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were largely implemented. In the coming 
year Montenegro should:  
→  ensure a clear delineation of roles and responsibilities between the budget inspection 
and internal audit functions to ensure the effective operation of public internal financial 
control; 
→ improve managerial accountability in the public administration by implementing the new 
law on internal and governance and secondary legislation in order to empower civil 
service management to delegate decision-making at the appropriate level and reinforce 
internal audit productivity and effectiveness across the public sector; 
→ ensure the effective functioning of the external audit system by appointing a president to 
the State Audit Institution;  
→ advance the fight against fraud to protect the EU’s financial interests by continuing the 
implementation of relevant legislation in line with Directive (EU) 2017/1371 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 5 July 2017 (the PIF Directive). 
  
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET  
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the free movement of goods. Some progress was 
made on alignment with the EU acquis on medicinal products for human and veterinary use, 
medical devices and construction products, and on improving the capacity of the bodies 
working on the EU acquis on chemicals.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ finish aligning its legislation with the EU acquis, particularly on medicinal products for 
human and veterinary use, on medical devices, motor vehicles and market surveillance; 
→ complete all the measures necessary to ensure full membership by end of 2025 of the 
Institute for Standardisation of Montenegro (ISME) in the European Committee for 
Standardisation (CEN) and the European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardisation 
(CENELEC), and fully address the non-conformities identified in the peer review carried 
out by the European cooperation for Accreditation (EA) in November 2024; 
→ continue to strengthen the human and financial capacity of its quality infrastructure and 
market surveillance bodies. 
Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers  
Montenegro has some level of preparation in the freedom of movement for workers. In the 
reporting period, some progress was made on the conclusion of further bilateral social 
security agreements.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain   
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
 
12 
 
→ further strengthen administrative structures to implement the EU acquis in this area and 
finalise the legislative alignment with the EU acquis; 
→ continue work to improve the administrative and technical capacity of the Employment 
Agency to ensure active labour market policies are relevant and evidence-based and 
continue the preparatory work to join EURES upon accession; 
→ prepare a feasibility study on the impact of the European Health Insurance Card (EHIC) 
on public finances by the end of 2025. 
Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services 
Montenegro has a good level of preparation in this area. Very good progress was made 
through the adoption of legislative amendments to align with directive 2006/123/EC on 
services, and the adoption of a number of sectorial laws to align with the provisions of the 
Professional Qualifications Directive (PQD) concerning the EU’s minimum training 
requirements (MTR). A new list of regulated professions was adopted and submitted to the 
Commission this year. Significant progress is noted also in the alignment of training 
programmes for 5 professions benefiting from automatic recognition with the minimum 
training requirements of the PQD. Work is also ongoing to ensure alignment with all the 
remaining provisions of the PQD beyond MTR, and with the proportionality test directive.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were largely implemented. In the 
coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ complete alignment with directive 2005/36/EC beyond minimum training requirements; 
ensure full alignment of the country’s existing training programmes for nurses 
responsible for general care, dental practitioners, medical doctors and pharmacists with 
the EU’s minimum training requirements and for architects ensure compliance for those 
training programmes that would in the future benefit from automatic recognition; 
→ further align sectoral legislation with the EU Services Directive as reflected in the 
Montenegrin mapping exercise.  
Chapter 4: Free movement of capital  
Montenegro has achieved a good level of preparation in this area and made good progress 
during the reporting period. Good progress was achieved in fulfilling the recommendations 
from 2024 in all areas.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were largely implemented. In the 
coming year, Montenegro should: 
→ remove restrictions on the acquisition of agricultural land by EEA nationals and on the 
free movement of capital in the Law on Voluntary Pension Funds;  
→ finalise alignment with the outstanding provisions of EU acquis on anti-money laundering 
and countering financing of terrorism;  
→ continue improving the supervisory capacity and reinforcing controls in the field of fight 
against money laundering and terrorism financing.  
Chapter 6: Company law  
Montenegro is between having a good level of preparation and being well advanced in the 
area of company law. Very good progress was made during the reporting period. In June, 
Montenegro adopted the amendments to the Law on capital markets aiming to align with the 
EU transparency and harmonisation directives, including the sanctioning regime. 
Furthermore, in July, Montenegro adopted the new company Law and Law on business 
 
13 
 
organisations and subsequent legislative amendments in October. In September, 
Montenegro adopted the revised Corporate Governance Code. These developments meet 
last year’s recommendations  aligning the country with the EU acquis on company law 
including the EU’s directive on women on boards, ensuring a more balanced gender 
representation among directors of listed companies.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented. In the coming year, 
Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ finalise the amendments of the identified national legislation to achieve full compliance 
with the fully online formation and registration of companies provided by the directive on 
the use of digital tools and processes in company law; 
→ continue developing the necessary software to ensure the orderly function of 
Montenegro’s connection with the EU Business Register Interconnection System (BRIS);  
→ start work in order to align with Directive 25/2025 amending Directives 2009/102/EC and 
2017/1132 as regards further expanding and upgrading the use of digital tools and 
processes in company law. 
Chapter 7: Intellectual property law  
Montenegro is well advanced in this area and made very good progress, particularly by re-
establishing the fully functional online registers of industrial property rights, adoption of 
amendments to the Law on copyright and related rights aligning with key EU Directives, 
including Directive (EU) 2019/789 and (EU) 2019/790, and adoption of amendments to the 
Criminal Code, which provides for a strict delineation between criminal offences and 
misdemeanours.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented. In the coming year, 
Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ hire additional staff to strengthen the administrative capacity and continue to provide 
training to enforcement officers and implement a number of measures to promote the 
understanding of copyright and related rights among the general public and specific 
target groups; 
→ continue implementing the remaining recommendations of the 2024 peer review report;  
→ start work to align national legislation with the EU’s new design legislation (in particular 
Directive 2024/2823). 
Chapter 8: Competition policy 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of competition policy. In the reporting period, 
there was some progress in following on the recommendations of the past year, notably with 
the adoption of the law on State aid control in July 2025. There was limited progress 
inbuilding a track record in enforcing competition rules and increasing the administrative 
capacity of the competition agency. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular:  
→ fully align in the area of the competition and secondary legislation in the areas of both 
competition and State aid;  
→ build a credible enforcement track record;  
→ build up sufficient administrative and judicial capacity in the area of antitrust, mergers 
and State aid control. 
 
14 
 
Chapter 9: Financial services  
Montenegro is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of financial 
services.  Very good progress was made.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented. In the coming year 
Montenegro should, in particular:  
→ urgently amend the Law on the development bank, addressing its non-compliance with 
the EU acquis; continue aligning banking legislation with the latest, revised versions of 
the Capital Requirements Regulation and the Capital Requirements Directive  
→ finalise implementation of the newly adopted laws of the EU acquis in this area;  
→ continue efforts to align with EU legislation in the area of financial markets infrastructure 
and start working on alignment with the EU framework for the recovery and resolution of 
insurance and reinsurance undertakings (IRRD)’ 
Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of consumer and health protection. Some 
progress was made, particularly in further aligning consumer protection and cross-border 
healthcare legislation, strengthening the role and effectiveness of the Council for Consumer 
Protection and developing a national strategy on immunisation.   
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ complete the alignment with the EU acquis on consumer protection, product safety and 
further strengthen the administrative structures and enforcement and redress capacity in 
this area; 
→ on communicable diseases prepare and adopt a national prevention, preparedness and 
response action plan for health crises; 
→ further align with the EU acquis on Human Organs and prepare a roadmap/action plan to 
align with the new Substances of Human Origin Regulation 2024/1938 and strengthen 
the administrative capacity and oversight to properly implement and enforce it 
 
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH 
Chapter 10: Digital transformation and media  
Montenegro is at a good level of preparation in the area of digital transformation and media. 
Some progress was made in aligning national cybersecurity legislation with the EU acquis 
and in adopting a national plan for broadband.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ further align national legislation with the Network and Information Security (NIS2) 
Directive and implement the legislation, including setting up the National Cyber Security 
Agency; 
→ ensure it maintains a good track record in enforcing the EU acquis on electronic 
communications 
and 
audiovisual 
media 
services, 
including 
safeguarding 
the 
independence of regulators; 
 
15 
 
→ continue recruiting additional staff to fill the remaining planned posts, further 
strengthening the administrative capacity in the areas of electronic communications, 
information society services and audiovisual media services. 
Chapter 16: Taxation  
Montenegro is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of taxation. 
Good progress was achieved on further alignment with the EU acquis on indirect and direct 
taxes, particularly by adopting the amendments to the VAT law, the excises law, the Law on 
personal income tax and the Law on corporate income tax. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should:  
→ take all necessary steps to fully align with international tax transparency standards, 
including implementing its obligations on the exchange of information; 
→ increase staffing in the Tax Administration to the appropriate level for effective and 
efficient operations, including fighting corruption, and provide extensive training in the 
fields of tax inspection and risk assessment;  
→ adopt and implement a national multiannual IT strategy and implementation plan and 
ensure the necessary budgetary and human resources for the development and 
maintenance of the required national tax IT systems and functionalities, and the 
preparation of these systems for their future interconnection with the relevant EU IT 
systems on VAT and excise as well as tax cooperation and exchange of information. 
Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy  
Montenegro remains moderately prepared in the area of economic and monetary policy. 
Limited progress was achieved, mainly on the division of responsibilities for the production 
of government finance statistics and fiscal notifications. Last year’s recommendations 
remain valid.  
In the coming year, Montenegro should: 
→ ensure that that all appointments to the Central Bank of Montenegro Governing Board are 
timely, transparent, focused on candidates’ technical competence, and not subject to 
partisan political activities;  
→ continue to implement the revised action plan for alignment with the EU acquis in the 
area; 
→ speed up and improve efforts to produce government finance statistics and fiscal 
notifications in line with the European system of national and regional accounts, the ESA 
2010 methodology. 
Chapter 19: Social policy and employment  
Montenegro is between having some and a moderate level of preparation in this area. Some 
progress was made, in particular in: (i) aligning the labour law, the Law on anti-discrimination 
and the Law on occupational health and safety at work; (ii) adopting strategies in the area of 
social protection reform; and (iii) advancing the reform of the Employment Agency. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular:  
→ Continue to strengthen the Employment Agency so that it can effectively fulfil its role as 
a modern public employment service, intensify reform efforts to improve the timely and 
 
16 
 
effective delivery of active labour market measures with an emphasis on their labour 
market relevance, and implement the Youth Guarantee and use the European Social 
Funds in the future;  
→ adopt and implement the Law on social and child protection, the Law on the protection of 
equality and prohibition of discrimination and amendments to the labour law ensuring 
that all acquis related to gender equality in this area is fully aligned in national provisions; 
→ continue efforts to enhance social dialogue. 
Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy  
Montenegro achieved a good level of preparation in this area. Good progress was made, 
particularly on the implementation of enterprise and industrial policies and on alignment with 
the EU Late Payments Directive. The recommendations from last year were therefore 
addressed. In December 2024, the chapter has been provisionally closed. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
remain largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ continue implementing the industrial policy for 2024-2028 in cooperation with all 
stakeholders; 
→ work to remove various business barriers identified by the Competitiveness Council; 
→ implement monitoring and evaluation provisions of the Programme for suppressing 
the informal economy. 
Chapter 25: Science and research  
Montenegro has a good level of preparation in this area. Some progress was made, 
particularly in completing the first cycle of the Smart Specialisation Strategy, strengthening 
academia-business cooperation and preparing the Law on scientific research activities for 
adoption.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should: 
→ adopt and start implementing the second cycle of the Smart Specialisation Strategy 
covering the 2026-2031 period; 
→ further strengthen the national innovation ecosystem; 
→ implement the Law on Scientific Research Activities (and associated implementation 
regulations).  
Chapter 26: Education and culture  
Montenegro has a good level of preparation in this area. Good progress was made, 
particularly on the adoption of the high-quality, comprehensive and costed Education Reform 
Strategy 2025-2035.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ ensure the new Education Reform Strategy (2025-2035) and its action plan 2025-2026 
are implemented effectively and in a timely manner by allocating them adequate funding 
in the 2026 education budget and the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework for 2028. 
→ focus on action plan measures that aim to improve the quality and inclusiveness of 
education and access to it; 
 
17 
 
→ ensure fully implementing, funding and monitoring the new Youth Strategy 2023-2027.  
Chapter 29: Customs policy 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in this area. Good progress was made in the past year, 
with the national implementation of the New Computerised Transit System and completion 
of preparations to join the Common Transit Convention. However, concerns remain about the 
staffing and funding of the Customs Authority’s IT department and progress in implementing 
major customs IT systems. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were mostly implemented. In the 
coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ implement the IT strategy for 2025-2026 and step up the development of the required IT 
systems, including by hiring more staff; 
→ adopt the Law on drug precursors and psychotropic substances and the new Law on free 
zones; 
→ continue combating customs fraud, in particular smuggling of tobacco products, and 
further extend its cooperation with the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF).  
 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY 
Chapter 14: Transport policy 
Montenegro is between having a moderate and a good level of preparation in this area. 
There was some progress, particularly by adoption of a new law on railways and improved 
monitoring and information systems for the maritime transport.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
partially valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should focus on key issues related to the 
closing benchmarks under Chapter 14, in particular: 
→ adopt a new law on rail safety and interoperability and ensure proper implementation of 
the law on railways in line with the EU acquis to ensure the operational independence and 
appropriate staffing of the railway regulatory body and the national railway safety 
authority;  
→ ensure compliance with the key provisions of the Single European Sky (SES 2+) 
Regulation, notably as regards the ownership and control structure of the air navigation 
service provider;   
→ adopt key laws on road transport and passenger rights in line with the EU acquis. 
Chapter 15: Energy 
Montenegro has reached a good level of preparation in this area. Some progress was 
achieved, particularly in adopting the laws on energy and security of supply of oil products 
and setting more ambitious energy efficiency targets.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
partially valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ adopt and implement the national energy and climate plan (NECP), in line with the Energy 
Community energy and climate targets; 
→ fully align its legislation with the Electricity Integration Package and implement the Law 
on security of supply of oil products;  
 
18 
 
→ accelerate deployment of energy efficiency measures along new targets, to align 
with the EU renovation wave policy. 
Chapter 21: Trans-European networks  
Montenegro is between having a moderate and a good level of preparation in this area. 
There was limited progress, particularly in hiring additional staff at the Ministry of Transport.   
The transport development strategy remains to be reviewed and updated, and persistent 
challenges remain regarding infrastructure projects, including the administrative capacity, 
management and decision-making.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular:  
→ review its transport development strategy and align it with the strategy for sustainable 
and smart mobility in the Western Balkans, confirming a policy shift towards rail and 
multimodality and reducing CO2 emissions and other environmental impacts;  
→ strengthen administrative capacity and revise institutional policies to improve 
decision-making on infrastructure projects and increase the capacity to absorb 
funding; 
→ Align its legislation with the EU Regulations on Trans-European networks in transport 
(TEN-T) and energy (TEN-E).  
Chapter 27: Environment and climate change  
Montenegro has some level of preparation in this area. Some progress was made, 
particularly in adopting and implementing legislation on waste management; as well as the 
national climate change adaptation plan covering the period until 2035. In April 2025 
Montenegro joined the LIFE programme, the EU'’s funding instrument for the climate and 
environment action.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and 
therefore remain mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular:  
→ significantly intensify work to achieve the closing benchmarks in Chapter 27, in particular 
in the areas of air quality, water, nature protection, waste management and climate 
change, and adopt the air quality management strategy and the nature protection 
strategy and action plan;  
→ adopt waste management plans at local level;  
→ finish aligning with and implement monitoring, reporting, verification and accreditation 
(MRVA) acquis for the purpose of aligning with the EU ETS in its full scope.  
 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION 
Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in this area. Good progress was achieved; 
implementation of the Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance for Rural Development 
(IPARD II) was finalised with almost 90% absorption; a comprehensive  Implementation plan 
on the establishment of a paying agency and an integrated administrative and control 
system (IACS) was adopted by the government, and legislation setting down the operational 
obligations and requirements of the paying agency was adopted as well as laws on wine and 
olive oil further aligning with the EU acquis.  
 
19 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Montenegro should in particular:  
→ intensify implementation of the IPARD III programme and allocate more resources, 
especially staffing,  
→ speed up implementation of the action plan for alignment with the EU acquis on 
agriculture and rural development, ensuring continued legislative alignment and 
finalisation of the vineyard register 
→ ensure that the activities and actions set out in the Implementation plan for the setting up 
of the paying agency and the establishment of the integrated and control system are 
undertaken and delivered within the specified timeframes with particular focus on 
updating the LPIS and drafting detailed plans for the establishment of an area monitoring 
system. 
Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in this area. Limited progress was made in recruiting 
new staff to the Administration for Food Safety, Veterinary and Phytosanitary Affairs of 
Montenegro.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ address all shortcomings identified in relation to this Chapter, in particular continue to 
strengthen the administrative, inspection and infrastructure capacities to implement the 
system of official controls, address conflicts of interest, and upgrade establishments 
producing food, feed and animal by-products to meet EU structural standards; 
→ ensure new employments in the food safety, animal health and welfare and phytosanitary 
sectors, strengthen the capacities through trainings and address all the shortcomings 
identified during the recent exchanges with the Commission on animal welfare 
→ establish robust passive surveillance of rabies and independently continue with the aerial 
rabies vaccination as necessary. In addition, strengthen the surveillance programme for 
notifiable avian diseases. 
Chapter 13: Fisheries and aquaculture 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in this area. Good progress was made, in particular, by 
adopting the Law on marine fisheries, the Law on aquaculture and the Law on structural 
support and State aid to the fisheries and aquaculture sector. This progress is required to 
reach closing benchmark 1 for this chapter.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ increase its administrative, control and inspection capacities; as foreseen in the Action 
Plan for Strengthening of Administrative, Inspection and Control Capacities adopted in 
July 2025; 
→  implement the Law on marine fisheries, the Law on aquaculture and the Law on 
structural support and State aid to the fisheries and aquaculture and continue the work 
on  developing secondary legislation (bylaws and rulebooks) necessary by the time of 
Accession. 
Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of regional policy and coordination of 
 
20 
 
structural instruments. Some progress was made, in particular by the government approving 
the updated Chapter 22 Action Plan and renewing the country’s interinstitutional dialogue 
through the re-established working group for Chapter 22. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ implement and closely monitor the roll out of the updated Chapter 22 Action Plan;  
→ secure adequate administrative capacity through recruitment processes based on merit 
and qualifications and strengthen interinstitutional coordination and structured dialogue 
with social partners (employers groups and trade unions), civil society, and local 
municipalities which should be involved in policy development, implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation; 
→ work on a solid pipeline of projects regardless of the source of funding, along with a 
framework for strategic sectoral orientations and policies; improve project preparation, 
procurement and implementation in line with EU and international standards. 
Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions  
Montenegro has some level of preparation in this area. Overall, some progress was made, 
particularly on the adoption of implementing legislation and guidelines on the procedure for 
planning resources that Montenegro pays to the EU budget. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ continue to strengthen the administrative capacity of the Directorate for Coordination 
and Management of EU Own Resources and of all other institutions involved in the own-
resources system, in particular by developing organisational and procedural links 
between these institutions; 
→ fully implement improvements to the IT system of the Revenue and Customs 
Administration, enabling a full audit trail and reporting on customs duties; 
→ adopt implementing legislation on collecting debts on movable and immovable property 
and procedures for writing off uncollectible customs debt and then start implementing 
the legislation. 
 
CLUSTER 6: EXTERNAL RELATIONS 
Chapter 30: External relations 
Montenegro has a good level of preparation in this area. During the reporting period, good 
progress was achieved, mainly in the field of regional cooperation. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ continue to actively participate in the implementation of measures under the Common 
Regional Market action plan for 2025-2027; 
→ adopt implementing legislation to address the issue of export credit insurance against 
non-market risks; 
→ align with the acquis on the screening of foreign direct investments. 
Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy