3 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION1  
1.1.  
CONTEXT 
Accession negotiations with Montenegro were opened in June 2012. To date, 33 negotiating 
chapters have been opened, of which three have been provisionally closed. Montenegro 
continued to broadly implement the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) and 
meetings of the joint bodies under the agreement took place at regular intervals.  
Overall, the government accelerated preparations on EU accession and worked effectively, in 
particular on meeting the requirements stemming from the interim benchmarks of chapters 
23 and 24. On 26 June 2024, the 16th meeting of the Accession Conference with Montenegro 
confirmed that Montenegro overall met the interim benchmarks for chapters 23 and 24 and 
adopted the closing benchmarks for these chapters. This opens a new phase in the 
accession negotiations, with the possibility to proceed with provisionally closing further 
chapters. To do so, it will be essential for Montenegro to establish a track record of 
implementation and deliver results on the ground. 
The political commitment of the Montenegrin authorities to the strategic goal of European 
integration has been consistently stated as the key priority for the country and staying firm 
on EU strategic orientation remains key. Since its formation in October 2023, the 
government has been operating in a generally stable political environment, with less 
polarisation compared to recent years.  
However, the country and its institutions are fragile and vulnerable to political crisis and 
potential institutional blockages. No nationwide elections took place; local elections were 
held in five municipalities. Overall, the electoral framework requires a comprehensive 
revision. The parliament elected in June 2023 held its first session at the end of October 
2023 and has generally been operating regularly, largely with consensus on key EU related 
reforms.  
Montenegro has actively engaged in implementing the new Growth Plan for the Western 
Balkans across its four pillars: (i) gradual integration with the EU’s Single Market, (ii) regional 
economic integration, (iii) fundamental reforms and (iv) increased financial support.   
Significant efforts have been made on gradual integration.  On 26 September 2024 
Montenegro adopted its Reform Agenda, as envisaged under the Reform and Growth 
Facility2. The Reform Agenda covers reform milestones in the areas of: (1) business 
environment and private sector development; (2) digital and green transition; (3) human 
capital development and (4) fundamental rights and the rule of law.  
The Commission’s 2024 rule of law report also covered Montenegro for the first time.  
 
 
1  is presented in a renewed format and structure. Main findings of the report, together with the 
recommendations (previously grey assessment boxes) are brought together at the beginning of the report. 
Furthermore, under the fundamentals cluster, for better readability and comparability across all reports, 
certain data is provided (also) in the form of graphs. 
2 OJ L, 2024/1449, 24.5.2024 
 
4 
 
1.2. MAIN FINDINGS OF THE REPORTS3 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
Democracy  
While the conduct of the elections is mostly satisfactory overall, the legal framework 
requires a comprehensive reform and alignment with EU law of the election legislation, 
voting and candidacy rights restrictions, transparency, mechanisms of dispute resolution, 
and oversight of campaign finance and media. The majority of pending OSCE/ODIHR 
recommendations have not been addressed. Montenegro should further strive to align its 
electoral processes to highest democratic standards. 
Parliament can exercise its powers in a mostly satisfactory way. Despite the persisting 
fragmentation of the parliamentary landscape, a majority has emerged since  October 2023, 
ending a prolonged period of political instability. Consensus on key EU accession related 
reforms extended to both ends of the political spectrum and EU-related legislation was 
adopted by unanimity in Parliament. However, tensions and inter-ethnic polarisation has 
resurfaced, having an adverse impact on political stability. During the summer of 2024 the 
Parliament took some hasty legislative initiatives failing to apply the necessary 
transparency. 
Montenegro has put in place a revised set of institutional structures that have been 
delivering adequately on the integration process. A new negotiation structure in charge of EU 
accession negotiations, headed by the Chief Negotiator, adequately fulfils its role of 
coordinating the country’s EU accession negotiations. The coordinating role of the Ministry 
of European Affairs should be strengthened, and additional resources and expertise added. 
The government has been holding regular sessions. However, recurring internal rifts 
between certain ministers and the Prime Minister have undermined the government’s 
cohesion and overall effectiveness. 
Civil society organisations (CSOs) in Montenegro operate in an enabling environment. The 
main legal and institutional framework for civil society to operate freely is in place. The role 
of civil society in policy making is formalised, yet at times purely symbolic. The Council for 
Cooperation between the Government and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) has not 
resumed work. Further efforts are needed to ensure genuine and meaningful cooperation 
between the government and CSOs.  
Public administration reform  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in this area. Overall, limited progress was made. Some 
measures were taken to improve the capital investment planning and management, notably 
by setting up a Public Investments Council, but more effort is needed to improve the public 
 
3 This report covers the period from 15 June 2023 to 1 September 2024. It is based on input from a variety of 
sources, including contributions from the government of Montenegro, EU Member States, European Parliament 
reports and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also includes the 
results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule 
of law.  
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of 
preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made 
during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, 
good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been used. 
 
 
5 
 
investment management framework. The number of requests for public information and 
related appeals further increased.   
The Commission's recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ adopt and implement amendments to the Law on access to information, in line with the 
principles of good public administration, and introduce measures to reduce the high 
number of requests for information and related appeals;  
→ amend and implement the Law on civil servants and state employees and the Law on 
local self-government, to ensure that recruitment follows the principles of merit, 
competence and transparency;  
→ put in place a unified, comprehensive and transparent system for capital investment 
planning and management.  
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights 
Montenegro remains moderately prepared to apply the EU acquis and European standards in 
this area and has made good progress overall. Good progress was achieved as regards 
justice reform, the fight against corruption, and freedom of expression and media freedom, 
with substantial reforms to the legislative and strategic frameworks. In June 2024, the 
European Commission assessed in its interim benchmark assessment report that 
Montenegro had fulfilled the interim benchmarks for chapter 23, and consequently the 
closing benchmarks for chapter 23 were set.  
Functioning of the judiciary  
Montenegro’s judicial system is moderately prepared and has made good progress on key 
judicial reforms and last year’s recommendations. A new strategic framework was put in 
place, and substantial amendments were adopted to the Law on Judicial Council and 
Judges, the Law on State Prosecution Service, and the Law on Special State Prosecution 
Service aiming to align them with the EU acquis and European standards, based on the 
European and Venice Commissions’ recommendations. Further efforts will need to be 
ensured to continue their alignment. Progress was made on transparent and merit-based 
high-level judicial appointments, following a long period of standstill. The Parliament 
appointed by qualified majority a new permanent Supreme State Prosecutor, three members 
of the Judicial Council and one judge of the Constitutional Court, and only a permanent 
President of the Supreme Court remains to be appointed. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were largely met. In the coming year, 
Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ appoint a permanent President of the Supreme Court, as well as other high-level judicial 
positions, through a merit-based and transparent procedure, to ensure the proper 
functioning and accountability of the justice system; 
→ ensure full and effective implementation of the improved strategic and legal framework 
to address existing challenges, and further align the legal framework, including the 
Constitution, in particular on the composition and decision making process of the 
Judicial Council, with the EU acquis and European standards on judicial independence, 
accountability, impartiality, integrity, efficiency, and professionalism of the judicial 
system, addressing the remaining recommendations from the European Commission, 
the Venice Commission and the Council of Europe Group of States against Corruption 
(GRECO), to decisively restore the stability, credibility and public trust in the justice 
system;  
 
6 
 
→ fully implement the Plan for the rationalisation of court network and the Strategy for 
digitalisation of the judiciary, to improve human, financial, and physical infrastructure in 
the judiciary and state prosecution service.  
Fight against corruption  
Montenegro is between having some level of preparation and a moderate level of 
preparation in the fight against corruption. Good progress was made on key reforms and 
last year’s recommendations. The strategic framework has improved with the adoption of a 
new a new 2024-2028 Anticorruption Strategy, aiming to align it with European and 
international standards, by addressing prevention and repression of corruption, as well as 
international cooperation. Likewise, the legal framework was substantially upgraded with the 
adoption of a new Law on Prevention of Corruption and amendments to the Law on 
Confiscation, with the aim to align them with European standards by addressing existing 
loopholes. In addition, a new Law on lobbying was adopted, in line with the EU acquis and 
European standards. New guidelines were adopted to improve the use of plea bargain 
agreements by prosecutors and judges in corruption cases, including high-level corruption, 
to ensure an effective and deterrent criminal justice response.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were largely met. In the coming year, 
Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ ensure full and effective implementation of the improved strategic and legal 
frameworks to address existing challenges, and continue its alignment with the EU 
acquis and European standards on prevention and fight against corruption by 
addressing the remaining recommendations from the European Commission, the 
Venice Commission and the Council of Europe Group of States against Corruption 
(GRECO) and peer review missions, including on its institutional set up and effective 
functioning;  
→ further improve the track record on corruption, including high-level corruption, by 
urgently strengthening the effective enforcement of the existing criminal legislation by 
the prosecution and courts, including by imposing effective and deterrent penalties; 
→ urgently amend Law on financing of political entities and election campaign to address 
the existing shortcomings and bring it fully in line with European standards, to 
substantially increase transparency and control of the spending of political parties, and 
prevent the abuse of state resources, including through dissuasive sanctions. 
Fundamental rights  
The legislative and institutional framework on fundamental rights is largely in place and 
Montenegro continues to largely meet its international obligations on human rights. 
However, more effort is needed to fully implement this framework and to ensure access to 
justice and enforcement of rights in administrative and judicial proceedings, in particular for 
vulnerable groups. The most vulnerable groups in society (including Roma and Egyptians, 
persons with disabilities, LGBTIQ persons) continued to be subjected to discrimination, hate 
speech and hate crime. More effort is needed to effectively address all recommendations 
from the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading 
Treatment (CPT). 
The Commission's recommendations from last year were partially implemented, with 
substantial progress in drafting a new anti-discrimination law, and the revision of relevant 
criminal legislation, and remain largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro needs in 
particular to: 
→ make substantial progress in implementing all pending recommendations of the 
 
7 
 
European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment 
(CPT);  
→ make substantial progress in implementing the Strategy for the Advancement of the 
Status of Roma4 and Egyptians in Montenegro, as well as commitments under the 
Poznan Declaration;  
→ adopt a new law on anti-discrimination and a new law on personal data protection, in line 
with the EU acquis, European and international standards.  
Freedom of expression 
Montenegro has a pluralistic media environment and is between having some level of 
preparation and moderate level of preparation  in the area of freedom of expression. Overall, 
good progress was achieved in the reporting period, notably with the adoption a media 
legislative package – new Media Law, new Law on Audiovisual Media Services and new Law 
on Public Broadcaster RTCG – in line with the EU acquis, and European standards, which 
was a key recommendation of last year’s report.   
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were largely implemented. In the 
coming year, Montenegro needs in particular to: 
→ continue to provide prompt and effective law enforcement and institutional protection to 
journalists against all forms of violence, while prioritising investigations and judicial 
follow-up in key cold cases;  
→ ensure consistent implementation of all media-related legislation and uphold a zero-
tolerance policy to any form of pressure or harassment of journalists, including by public 
officials;  
→ safeguard against any form of undue influence on the editorial, institutional or financial 
independence of the public broadcaster RTCG, which needs to comply fully with the law 
and with the highest standards of professional integrity and accountability. 
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security  
Montenegro has between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of justice, 
freedom and security. Montenegro has made good progress combating organised crime 
and on the management of migration and asylum. In June 2024, the European Commission 
assessed in its interim benchmark assessment report that Montenegro had fulfilled the 
interim benchmarks for chapter 24, and consequently the closing benchmarks for chapter 24 
were adopted.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ increase the efficiency of prosecution/adjudication for serious and organised crime 
cases, especially cases of money laundering; address the lengthiness of trials and 
frequent adjournments in organised crime cases; ensure the application of key legal 
concepts such as stand-alone money laundering (independent of the predicate crime) 
and quality of evidence by the courts and the prosecution; and ensure the seizure and 
confiscation of criminal assets – by systematic tracking of money flows, the efficient 
 
4 In line with the terminology of European institutions the umbrella term ‘Roma’ is used here to refer to a number 
of different groups, without denying the specificities of these groups. 
 
 
8 
 
use of special investigative measures and the consistent use of extended confiscation; 
→ further strengthen border management capacity by addressing critical gaps in border 
surveillance infrastructure and equipment; take the necessary steps to set up an 
advance passenger information system and a biometric migrant registration system; 
→ further align Montenegro’s visa policy with the EU’s list of visa-required countries, in line 
with the commitments taken in the Reform Agenda, in particular with regard to countries 
presenting irregular migration or security risks to the EU. 
 Fight against organised crime  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the fight against organised crime. Good progress 
was made with the adopted legislative amendments in the areas of money laundering and 
trafficking in human beings.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ make progress on filling vacancies in the Special Police Unit (SPU), SSPO and High Court 
of Podgorica; provide suitable premises to the SSPO and SPU and reorganise the Special 
Investigative Measure (SIM) division;  
→ further amend its legislation on weapons to align with EU acquis and international 
standards;  
→ address the risks of corruption and infiltration of organised crime into law enforcement 
agencies and the judiciary by implementing a strong prevention policy and providing a 
stringent judicial response to detected cases; urgently implement the reorganisation in 
the Ministry of Interior /police in the area of corruption prevention and internal control. 
ECONOMIC CRITERIA 
The existence of a functioning market economy 
Montenegro has made some progress and is moderately prepared in developing a 
functioning market economy. Strong economic growth and one-off revenues supported a 
small budget surplus in 2023, but fiscal vulnerabilities remain given high public financing 
needs, elevated interest rates and persistent social spending pressures. The labour market 
situation improved, but structural problems persist. The banking sector remained well 
capitalised and liquid. Some progress was made in improving the business environment and 
preparing the reform of state-owned enterprises (SOEs). 
Last year’s recommendations were addressed to some extent but remain mostly valid. To 
improve the functioning of the market economy, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ adopt and implement additional fiscal measures, which would help targeting the 
achievement of a budget deficit below 3% of GDP, and a public debt ratio converging 
towards 60% of GDP by 2026; 
→ implement the Law on budget and fiscal responsibility to set up a fiscal council, while 
ensuring full transparency in selecting its council members; and 
→ prepare an analysis of the economic and fiscal impact of current tax exemptions and a 
fiscal risk assessment of SOEs. 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the EU 
Montenegro has made limited progress and is moderately prepared to cope with 
 
9 
 
competitive pressure and market forces in the EU. The education system still faces 
numerous challenges, as shown by the results of international surveys. Efforts to advance a 
green and digital transition have continued, but large infrastructure gaps persist. Further 
efforts are needed to diversify Montenegro’s narrow production base. Obstacles to 
increasing the productivity and competitiveness of local firms include the low value added 
by domestic products, the small size of local companies and their low level of participation 
in exports. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and remain mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ continue implementing digital services for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises 
and prioritise the development and implementation of an interactive e-government 
platform for transactional electronic services; 
→ improve programmes for dual vocational education and training and tertiary education, 
in close cooperation with business associations, and providing work-based learning;  
→ improve the institutional and regulatory environment for the green transition and 
increase energy resilience by adopting the National Energy and Climate Plan and 
implementing energy efficiency legislation. 
Chapter 5 - Public procurement  
Montenegro has between a moderate and a good level of preparation in this area. Some 
progress was achieved in 2023 in further improving the functioning of the electronic 
procurement system. 
The Commission’s recommendation from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ increase the level of transparency regarding public procurement contracted under 
intergovernmental agreements and reduce the number of procurement procedures for 
which no contract notice is published; 
→ reach full compliance with the EU public procurement rules and principles in all cases. 
Chapter 18 - Statistics  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of statistics. Overall, some progress was 
made. In particular, the enumeration and data processing phases of the national population 
and housing census were completed. Measures were taken to reinforce the Statistical Oﬃce 
of Montenegro (MONSTAT), but challenges remain with human resources and infrastructure.  
The Commission's recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ start regular production and transmission to Eurostat of: (i) government financial 
statistics, which can be published; and (ii) properly completed tables for the excessive 
deficit procedure;  
→ strengthen the human and financial resources of MONSTAT so it can fully fulfil its 
responsibilities and retain expert staff; 
→ implement the agricultural census and publish the results of the national population and 
housing census, in line with EU requirements and recommendations.  
Chapter 32 - Financial control 
 
10 
 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of ﬁnancial control. Overall, limited progress 
was made.  Some effort was made to strengthen the centralised budget inspection function 
at the Ministry of Finance. The delegation of authority in the ﬁeld of ﬁnancial management 
and internal control remains limited.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ further operationalise the centralised budget inspection function in the Ministry of 
Finance, by allocating appropriate staff; 
→ extend the application of managerial accountability in public administration, with 
increased delegation of authority in the field of financial management and internal 
control; 
→ further align its legislation with the EU acquis on fraud prevention regarding the EU’s 
financial interests, by: (i) adopting amendments to the Criminal Code; (ii) further 
strengthening the coordination capacity of the National Anti-fraud Coordination Service; 
and (iii) adopting a new national anti-fraud strategy for 2024-2027.  
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET 
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods  
Montenegro is moderately prepared as regards the free movement of goods. Some 
progress was made on alignment with the EU acquis on chemicals, medicines for human 
and veterinary use, medical devices and on construction products, and on improving the 
capacity of the bodies working on the EU chemicals acquis.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ complete the alignment of its legislation with the EU acquis, notably on medicines, 
motor vehicles and market surveillance; 
→ complete all the measures necessary to ensure full membership of the Institute for 
Standardisation of Montenegro (ISME) in the European Committee for Standardisation 
(CEN) and the European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardisation (CENELEC); 
→ continue to strengthen the human and financial capacity of its quality infrastructure and 
market surveillance bodies.  
Chapter 2 - Freedom of movement for workers  
Montenegro has some level of preparation. Limited progress was made related to the 
conclusion of bilateral social security agreements. Initial steps were also taken to upgrade 
the administrative and technical capacity of the Employment Agency.  
Last year’s recommendations remain largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in 
particular: 
→ take decisive action to improve the functioning of the Employment Agency such that it 
promotes and implements relevant and evidence -based active labour market policies; 
→ adopt an action plan for implementing the EU acquis in this area and step up legislative 
alignment to implement EU acquis on free movement of workers upon accession;  
→ step up efforts to conclude bilateral social security agreements with all EU Member 
States, and at least with additional five Member States in the coming year.  
 
11 
 
Chapter 3 - Right of establishment and freedom to provide services  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in this area. Limited progress was made by adopting a 
new strategy for developing the postal services in 2024-2028, and in the area of services by 
establishing the Point of Single contact portal.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
partially valid especially the need to progress in the area concerning professional 
qualifications to advance on the closing benchmarks in this chapter. In the following period, 
Montenegro should in particular: 
→  adopt and finalise the justification grounds for each of the professions it regulates; 
→ amend the horizontal law on services to ensure full compliance with the EU Services 
Directive and adopt legislation to align at least 5 priority service sectors with the EU 
Services Directive, following the finalisation of an exhaustive mapping exercise regarding 
the state of play concerning alignment of Montenegrin sectoral legislation with the EU 
Services Directive;  
→ accelerate the alignment of the study programmes and finalise it for the seven sectoral 
professions (doctors of medicine, dental practitioners, architects, general care nurses, 
veterinary surgeons, pharmacists and midwives) with the Professional Qualifications 
Directive. 
Chapter 4 - Free movement of capital  
Montenegro is moderately prepared  in this area. Some progress was made mainly related 
to the adoption of the new Law on the prevention of money laundering and terrorist 
financing, amendments to the Law on games of chance and the adoption of secondary 
legislation on payment systems.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ continue aligning with the EU acquis on capital movements and payments, including on 
the acquisition of property rights by EU nationals; 
→ strengthen further the anti-money laundering supervision of the non-financial sector, 
particularly in high-risk areas such as games of chance, by further amending the Law on 
games of chance and the Law on the prevention of money laundering and terrorism 
financing.  
Chapter 6 - Company law  
Montenegro has good level of preparation in the area of company law. No progress was 
made.  
The Commission’s recommendation from last year were not implemented and remain valid. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ finalise, adopt and start implementing  (i) the draft company Law and Law on business 
organisations, to further align national legislation with the acquis on company law 
including on certain aspects of company law, which includes amongst others the 
conversion of documents and information recorded in the national business register 
into a machine readable and searchable format or structured data, the connection of the 
national business register with the EU Business Register Interconnection System (BRIS), 
 
12 
 
(ii) the  use of digital tools and processes, (iii) the  cross-border mergers, divisions, 
conversions and (iv) the encouragement of long-term shareholder engagement; 
→ complete alignment with: (i) the Transparency Directive, including the sanctioning 
regime and the Directive on the harmonisation of transparency requirements; and (ii) the 
Directive on accounting, as regards the financial reporting regime for micro and small 
companies and dividend distribution; 
→ finalise and adopt the revision of the Corporate Governance Code.  
Chapter 7 - Intellectual property law  
Montenegro is between having a good level of preparation and being well advanced in the 
area of intellectual property law. Very good  progress was made during the reporting period 
in aligning national legislation with the EU acquis namely by adopting amendments to the 
Law on copyright and related rights and through the adoption of the Law on ratification of 
the Geneva Act of the Lisbon Agreement on Appellations of Origin and Geographical 
Indications.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were fully implemented. In the coming 
year Montenegro should in particular: 
→ continue to reinforce the implementation of the intellectual property strategy 2023-2026, 
specifically addressing staff shortages, providing annual training to market inspectors 
on IPR matters and strengthening the IT capacity;    
→ improve criminal enforcement by, inter alia, adopting legislation and providing trainings 
to the relevant authorities; 
→ reestablish a fully functional online register of industrial property rights by end of 2024 
publicly available online; 
Chapter 8 - Competition policy  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in this area. No progress was made on last year’s 
recommendations. A decision on the prohibition of cartel practices was taken and 
secondary legislation on State aid was adopted.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not  implemented and remain  
valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ adopt the new Law on protection of competition and the new Law on control of State 
aid, ensuring further alignment with the EU acquis. Finalise and implement a plan to 
ensure the financial independence of the Agency for Protection of the Competition 
(APC) and judicial overview in compliance with the Directive to empower the 
competition authorities of the Member States to be more effective enforcers and to 
ensure the proper functioning of the internal market;  
→ strengthen administrative and judicial capacities in the area of antirust, mergers and 
State aid control, including by ensuring additional personnel, as well as specific 
measures to address identified gaps in judicial capacity;  
→ Montenegro should intensify its efforts to further improve its track record on antitrust, 
mergers and State aid, as well as to conclude the pending major investigations of 
benchmark State aid cases, and, if necessary, recover the funds in question. 
Chapter 9 - Financial services  
 
13 
 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of financial services. Limited progress was 
achieved, with some secondary legislation acts adopted by the central bank , while work 
continued on several legal acts on banking, insurance and capital markets.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
remain valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should: 
→ adopt EU-aligned legislation on capital requirements, bank resolution and supervision of 
financial conglomerates; 
→ continue working on alignment with the EU acquis on insurance, including Solvency II 
Directive; 
→ complete alignment with the EU laws on open-ended investment funds,  alternative 
investment funds and financial market infrastructures. 
Chapter 28 - Consumer and health protection 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of consumer and health protection. Some 
progress was made by strengthening the national Consumer Protection Council, by further 
alignment with the EU acquis on communicable diseases and the adoption of 2023-2027 
healthcare development strategy and 2023-2024 action plan.   
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ complete the alignment of national legislation with the EU consumer protection acquis 
and with the EU acquis on substances of human origin and on patients’ rights in cross-
border healthcare; 
→ further strengthen the role and effectiveness of the Council for Consumer Protection; 
→ develop a national strategy on immunisation, in line with the best international practices 
and methodologies. 
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH  
Chapter 10 - Digital transformation and media  
Montenegro has a good level of preparation in the area of digital transformation and media. 
Very good progress was made, with the adoption of the Law on audio-media visual services 
as part of a comprehensive media reform package and the adoption of the Law on electronic 
communication aligning with the European Electronic Communications Code. Through this 
Law, Montenegro brough its legislation in line with the EU acquis as regards the provisions 
on the independence of the national regulatory authority for electronic communications. In 
addition, the Agency for Electronic Media (AEM), now known as Agency for Audiovisual 
Media Services (AMU), was granted legal powers to impose fines. Montenegro launched 
public calls under the Digital Europe Programme.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented. In the coming year, 
Montenegro should in particular: 
→ adopt and implement the Law on information security, fully aligning with the Network 
and Information Security (NIS2) Directive;  
→ ensure it maintains a good track record on enforcing the EU acquis on electronic 
communications and audiovisual media services;  
→ proceed with additional recruitment of staff to fulfil the remaining planned posts, thus  
 
14 
 
strengthen 
further 
the 
administrative 
capacities 
in 
the 
field 
of 
electronic 
communications, information society services and audio-visual media services. 
Chapter 16 - Taxation  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of taxation. Overall, limited progress was 
made, mainly on further aligning the legislation on excise taxes and VAT and corporate 
income tax with the EU acquis. The separation of the Tax Administration from the former 
Revenue and Customs Administration entailed organisational changes and slowed down the 
development of administrative capacity and required infrastructure, notably as concerns the 
interconnection with the EU IT systems in the area of taxation.   
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ further remove indirect tax exemptions that are not aligned with the EU acquis including 
those on fuel supplied to pleasure boats, and introduce fuel markers to avoid misuse of 
reduced-rate fuel;  
→ increase staffing in the Tax Administration to the level necessary for effective and 
efficient operations, including fighting corruption, and provide extensive training in the 
fields of tax inspection and risk assessment;  
→ strengthen the technical capacity and infrastructure needed to apply the EU IT systems, 
such as the Excise Movement Control System (EMCS) and the VAT Information 
Exchange System (VIES), and the IT systems necessary for tax cooperation and 
exchanging information in the field of direct taxation.    
Chapter 17 - Economic and monetary policy  
Montenegro is moderately prepared and has made some progress in the area of economic 
and monetary policy. The implementation of the action plan for alignment with the EU acquis 
advanced. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should: 
→ continue to implement the revised action plan for alignment with the EU acquis under 
this chapter; 
→ ensure that the Ministry of Finance, the Central Bank of Montenegro and Monstat 
cooperate, coordinate among themselves and have appropriate capacity to produce 
government finance statistics and fiscal notifications in accordance with the ESA 2010 
methodology. 
Chapter 19 - Social policy and employment  
Montenegro has some level of preparation in this area. Some progress was made, in 
particular on work towards the legislative alignment of the labour law and on anti-
discrimination, as well as advancing the reform of the Employment Agency.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ continue to strengthen the Employment Agency so that it can efficiently play its role as 
a modern public employment service, and effectively implement the Youth Guarantee 
and future use of the European Social Fund (ESF); 
→ intensify reform efforts for improved and timely provision of active labour market 
 
15 
 
measures with an emphasis on their labour market relevance; 
→ adopt the Strategy and Law on social and child protection and start implementing the 
reform. 
Chapter 20 - Enterprise and industrial policy  
Montenegro achieved a good level of preparation in this area. Good progress was made, 
notably by implementing enterprise and industrial policy and completing preparations for 
alignment with the current EU policy framework.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were mostly implemented. In the 
coming year, Montenegro should: 
→ implement the new industrial policy, in cooperation with all relevant stakeholders;  
→ align with the EU Late Payments Directive;  
→ continue addressing various business barriers identified by the Competitiveness 
Council.  
Chapter 25 - Science and research  
Montenegro has a good level of preparation in this sector. Good progress was made, 
notably on continuing the implementation of the Smart Specialisation Strategy and 
strengthening academia-business cooperation and adoption of the strategy for scientific 
research. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should:  
→ adopt a new smart specialisation strategy and continue to implement it; 
→ further strengthen the national innovation ecosystem; 
→ adopt the new research and development strategy and adopt the law on scientific 
research activities. 
Chapter 26 - Education and culture  
Montenegro has a good level of preparation in this area. Some progress was made, notably 
on advancing preparations for the sectoral reform strategy and implementing the strategy 
on early and preschool education. The recommendation related to evaluation mechanisms 
for practical learning remains to be addressed. 
In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ adopt a high-quality, comprehensive and costed education sector strategy with clear 
and realistic targets based on evidence; and a solid financial framework for its 
sustained implementation; 
→ put in place mechanisms to evaluate practical learning at VET and higher education 
levels and to ensure increased work-based learning with employers. 
→ ensure full implementation, funding and monitoring of the new Youth Strategy 2023-
2027. 
Chapter 29 - Customs union  
Montenegro is moderately prepared for the customs union. It made some progress, 
advancing preparations for its accession to the Common Transit Convention and amending 
 
16 
 
its legislative framework on intellectual property rights and cultural goods.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ finalise the legal and technical preparations for the country’s accession to the Common 
Transit Convention and for the implementation and operation of the New Computerised 
Transit System (NCTS – phase 5); 
→ adopt and implement new business strategy and IT strategy of Customs Administration; 
→ ensure sufficient staffing levels and funding to upgrade its IT systems, enabling 
interconnection and interoperability with the EU electronic customs environment. 
 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY  
Chapter 14 - Transport policy  
Montenegro is between moderate and a good level of preparation in this area. There was 
limited progress on key reforms, with the adoption of the new road safety strategy.   
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and r 
remain valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ adopt a new railway law to ensure that fully functional,  operationally independent and 
appropriately staffed   railway regulatory body and  railway safety authority are in place;  
→ lay down the strategic Intelligent Transport System framework for the rail and maritime 
networks; 
→ ensure full implementation, funding and monitoring of 2024-2030 road safety strategy. 
Chapter 15 - Energy  
Montenegro has reached a good level of preparation in this area. Limited progress was 
achieved, with drafting the National Energy and Climate Plan and implementing renewable 
energy projects. Montenegro is signiﬁcantly delayed on drafting and adoption of the 
National Energy and Climate Plan, alignment with the acquis on mandatory oil stocks and on 
alignment with the Electricity Integration Package. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
remain largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular: 
→ finalise and start implementing the National Energy and Climate Plan, in line with the 
Energy Community energy and climate targets; 
→ adopt and implement the Law on energy, transposing the Electricity Integration Package 
and the Law on security of supply of oil products, also appointing the stockholding body 
for the mandatory oil reserves;  
→ accelerate alignment with the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive and  
deployment of energy efficiency along new targets, to align with the EU renovation wave 
policy.  
Chapter 21 - Trans-European networks  
Montenegro is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in this area. There was 
no progress on key reforms.  
 
17 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ review its transport development strategy and align it with the strategy for sustainable 
and smart mobility in the Western Balkans, confirming a policy shift towards rail, 
multimodality and reducing CO2 emissions and other environmental impacts; 
→ strengthen administrative capacity and develop institutional policies to hire and retain 
skilled staff to manage infrastructure projects in the areas of transport, 
telecommunications and energy; 
→ revise institutional policies to improve decision-making on infrastructure projects and 
increase the capacity to absorb funding. 
Chapter 27 - Environment and climate change  
Montenegro has some level of preparation in this area. Some progress was made in further 
aligning national legislation with the EU acquis, namely through the adoption of the Law on 
waste management, the Law on biocidal products, and, in the field of civil protection, by 
connecting fully to the EU’s Common Emergency Communication and Information System.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented , and remain  
valid, in particular on the priority reforms needed. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in 
particular:  
→ signiﬁcantly intensify work to achieve the closing benchmarks for Chapter 27, 
specifically on implementation and enforcement of legislation, including the adoption 
and implementation of sectoral strategies, particularly in the areas of waste 
management, air and water quality, nature protection, and climate change and ensure 
that there is there an institutional structure in place to deliver coordinated, strategic 
planning for climate and environmental investments; 
→ adopt implementing legislation necessary to implement the new Law on waste 
management and finalise and adopt the national waste management plan for the next 
5-year period, followed by the adoption of waste management plans at local level;  
→ implement commitments under the Energy Community’s Decarbonisation Roadmap in 
particular adopt and implement the National Energy and Climate Plan (NECP), and take 
steps for the alignment with the EU Emission Trading Scheme (ETS). 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION  
Chapter 11 - Agriculture and rural development 
Montenegro remains moderately prepared in this area. Good progress was achieved, mainly 
through  improved implementation of the Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance for Rural 
Development (IPARD II and III), drafting an implementation  plan for the establishment  of a  
Paying Agency and an integrated administrative and control system (IACS) extending the 
area included  in the land parcel identification system (LPIS). However, there were no 
developments regarding legislative alignment apart from the wine sector.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were largely implemented. In the 
coming year, Montenegro should in particular:  
→ ensure full absorption of the IPARD II funds by the end of 2024,  and intensify the 
implementation of the  IPARD III programme;  
→ further implement the action plan for aligning with the EU acquis on agriculture and rural 
 
18 
 
development including the setting up of the paying agency and adoption of related 
legislation; 
→ ensure further progress with the roll-out of the land parcel identiﬁcation system (LPIS) 
across the whole territory. 
Chapter 12 - Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy  
Montenegro remains moderately prepared. Some progress was achieved through further 
alignment of implementing legislation with the EU acquis, the adequate monitoring of 
zoonoses, zoonotic agents and their antimicrobial resistance (AMR), the prompt tackling of 
an outbreak of African swine fever and an increase of establishments fulfilling EU standards.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid.  In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular:   
→ ﬁnalise alignment of its legislation with the acquis on  oﬃcial controls and strengthen its 
administrative, inspection and infrastructure capacities to implement the system of 
oﬃcial controls;  
→ establish robust passive surveillance of rabies and independently continue with the 
aerial rabies vaccination as necessary. In addition, strengthen the surveillance 
programme for notiﬁable avian diseases; 
→ pursue the efforts to approximate national legislation with the EU animal welfare 
legislation until alignment is complete and strengthen administrative and inspection 
capacities for its implementation by engaging additional staff for food safety, veterinary 
and phytosanitary sectors. 
Chapter 13 - Fisheries and aquaculture 
Montenegro has some level of preparation in this area. Some progress was made through 
the adoption of the new 2024-2029 fisheries and aquaculture strategy and its action plan, 
the adoption of an agreement on subsidies and fisheries within the WTO framework, the 
adoption of the Law on market organisation in fisheries and aquaculture and the updating of 
legislation.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and  remain 
partially valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should, in particular:  
→ increase its administrative, control and inspection capacities;  
→ ﬁnalise and adopt pending legislation on structural measures and State aid in ﬁsheries 
and aquaculture,  on Marine ﬁsheries and Mariculture  and start work on implementing 
legislation. 
Chapter 22 - Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments  
Montenegro is moderately prepared in this area. Some progress was made with work on 
updating the Chapter 22 Action Plan and preparations for IPA III operational programmes 
(Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance) and the related budget entrustments. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular 
→ advance implementation of the updated action plan for chapter 22. 
→ strengthen its administrative capacity in both designing and implementing policies 
relevant for the country’s economic and social cohesion and its regional 
 
19 
 
competitiveness,  including strengthened interinstitutional coordination and structured 
dialogue with social partners (employers groups and unions) and civil society, which 
should be involved in policy development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation. 
→ work on a solid pipeline of projects irrespective of the source of funding, along with a 
framework for strategic sectoral orientations and policies, while improving project 
preparation, procurement and implementation in line with EU and international 
standards. 
Chapter 33 - Financial and budgetary provisions  
Montenegro has some level of preparation in this area. Overall, limited progress was made. 
Progress took place mainly concerning the adoption of implementing legislation and 
guidelines on the procedure for planning the resources that Montenegro pays to the EU 
budget.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular:  
→ strengthen the administrative capacity of the Directorate for Coordination and 
Management of EU Own Resources and of all other institutions involved in the own-
resources system, notably by developing organisational and procedural links between 
these institutions; 
→ fully implement the improvements to the IT system of the Revenue and Customs 
Administration enabling a full audit trail and reporting on customs duties;  
→ adopt implementing legislation on collecting debts on movable and immovable property 
and procedures for writing off uncollectible customs debt and start their 
implementation.  
 
CLUSTER 6: EXTERNAL RELATIONS  
Chapter 30 - External relations 
Montenegro has a good level of preparation. Some progress was made in the field of 
regional cooperation and development policy and humanitarian aid.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Montenegro should in particular: 
→ continue to actively participate in the implementation of measures under the Common 
Regional Market action plan for 2021-2024, implement actions under the new action 
plan for 2025-2028 and take the necessary steps to implement  Additional Protocol 7 to 
the CEFTA on dispute settlement; 
→ ensure proper implementation of the new Law on international development 
cooperation and international humanitarian assistance and set up a database on donor 
support projects. 
Chapter 31 - Foreign, security and defence policy 
Montenegro has a good level of preparation. Good progress was made as the country 
maintained its track record of full alignment with relevant statements by the High 
Representative on behalf of the EU and Council decisions on sanctions, including with the EU 
restrictive measures related to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and has provided assistance to 
 
20 
 
Ukraine. Montenegro continued to participate in EU crisis management missions and 
operations under the common security and defence policy.   
The recommendations from last year were implemented. In the coming year, Montenegro 
should, in particular:  
→  maintain its full alignment with the EU common foreign and security and strengthen its 
enforcement capacity regarding restrictive measures. 
→  take further efforts to close space for foreign interference and information 
manipulation, including disinformation, and take action towards building resilience 
against all forms of hybrid threats by adopting the strategy on countering hybrid threats 
and its related action plan.  
 
1.3. 
STATE OF PLAY OF THE ACCESSION NEGOTIATIONS  
CLUSTERS 
Chapters / areas  
Date chapter opened / closed with 
interim or closing benchmarks   
Fundamentals 
 
All chapters open 
23-Judiciary and fundamental rights  
24-Justice, freedom, security  
  5-Public procurement  
18-Statistics  
32-Financial control 
…Economic criteria 
…Functioning of democratic institutions  
…Public administration reform 
December 2013  
December 2013  
December 2013  
December 2014 
June 2014  
 
- 
- 
Internal market 
All chapters open 
 1-Free movement of goods   
 2-Freedom of movement for workers   
 3-Right of establishment and freedom 
to establish services  
 4-Free movement of capital 
 6-Company law  
 7-Intellectual property rights 
 8-Competition  
 9-Financial services  
28-Consumer and health protection 
June 2017  
December 2017  
December 2017  
… 
June 2014  
December 2013  
March 2014  
June 2020  
June 2015  
December 2014   
Competitiveness and 
inclusive growth 
 
 
All chapters open,  
ch.25  and 26 
provisionally closed 
10-Information society and media  
16-Taxation 
17-Economic and monetary policy 
19-Social policy and employment  
20-Enterprise and industrial policy  
25-Science and research 
  
26-Education and culture 
  
29-Customs union  
March 2014  
March 2015  
June 2018  
December 2016  
December 2013  
December 2012 (opened and closed - 
no closing benchmarks);  
April 2013  (opened and closed – no 
closing benchmarks) 
December 2014   
Green Agenda and 
sustainable 
connectivity 
All chapters open 
14- Transport policy 
15- Energy 
21-Trans-European Networks 
27-Environment and climate change  
December 2015  
December 2015  
June 2015  
December 2018  
Resources, 
agriculture and 
11-Agriculture and rural development  
12-Food safety, veterinary, phytosanitary 
December 2016