1.1  
CONTEXT  
Accession negotiations with Montenegro were opened in June 2012. To date, 33 negotiating 
chapters have been opened, of which three have been provisionally closed. Montenegro 
accepted the revised enlargement methodology. Montenegro continued to implement the 
Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) and meetings of the joint bodies under the 
agreement took place at regular intervals.  
Overall progress in the accession negotiations depends on progress in the area of rule of law, 
as per the requirements set out in the Negotiating Framework as well as in the revised 
methodology formally accepted by Montenegro in the Intergovernmental Conference held on 
22 June 2021. Progress towards meeting the interim benchmarks set in the rule of law 
Chapters 23 and 24 is key to achieving further progress in the negotiations overall, as no 
further chapters will be provisionally closed before this milestone is reached. The 14th 
Intergovernmental Conference held on 13 December 2021 and the SA Council held on 14 
July 2022 provided political steer on accelerating work to meet that milestone. In order for 
Montenegro to take further steps forward in the accession path, it was urged to address all 
remaining gaps in the areas of freedom of expression and media freedom, the fight against 
corruption and organised crime, and to accelerate and deepen reforms on the independence, 
professionalism and accountability of the judiciary. The pace of this work will be determined 
by Montenegro.  
The Montenegrin authorities’ political commitment to the strategic goal of EU integration 
and their ambition to move forward in the accession negotiations based on continuing reform 
progress have been consistently stated as the country’s key priority. The failure to build 
consensus on key matters of national interest continued and caused two governments to fall 
on votes of no-confidence. Political volatility, government instability and tensions have 
stalled decision-making processes and reform implementation.  
Montenegro’s continued full alignment with the EU’s foreign and security policy, including 
EU restrictive measures following Russia’s unprovoked aggression against Ukraine, its vocal 
support for EU initiatives at the UN in response to this aggression, as well as for international 
law and a rules-based international order, is commendable. This is a strong signal of the 
country’s strategic orientation and commitment to the goal of EU accession. 
Political commitment, credible engagement and consensus building by all relevant 
institutions and actors in carrying out Montenegro’s EU reform agenda remain fundamental. 
It is important that all political actors exercise their responsibility to participate in political 
debates in Parliament and engage in constructive coordination on all relevant EU-related 
legislative initiatives. 
The COVID-19 pandemic continued throughout the reporting period. In spring 2022, 
Montenegro lifted partially the restrictions, introduced to limit the severity of the pandemic. 
During the reporting period, Montenegro adopted fiscal measures to mitigate the severe 
economic and social impact of the crisis.  
 
 
4

* * *

1.2  
SUMMARY OF THE REPORT1  
As regards the political criteria, political tensions, polarisation, the absence of constructive 
engagement between political parties and the failure to build consensus on key matters of 
national interest continued and caused two fractious governments to fall on votes of no-
confidence. The proper functioning of Montenegrin institutions has been affected by political 
volatility, government instability and tensions within the ruling majorities, stalling decision-
making processes and reform implementation. The main judicial bodies, including the 
Constitutional Court, have been operating in an incomplete composition due to the 
Parliament’s inability to elect new members, thus undermining their proper functioning. As 
of mid-September the Constitutional Court was unable to fulfil its role due to the absence of a 
quorum, amplifying political uncertainty. 
The conclusion of the Fundamental Agreement with the Serbian Orthodox Church had an 
impact on the political atmosphere and raised further tensions. Overall, the governments and 
the Parliament failed to demonstrate in practice their engagement as regards the EU-related 
reform agenda. 
There was no progress with regard to a comprehensive reform of the electoral legal and 
institutional framework, including on the Organization for Security and Co-operation in 
Europe (OSCE) Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) 
recommendations, following the observation mission of the 2020 parliamentary elections. 
The Parliamentary Committee for a comprehensive electoral reform was not operational from 
June until November 2021 and  met only twice in 2022, before its mandate come to an end in 
July 2022. Local elections took place in five municipalities. In May 2022, the Parliament 
adopted amendments to the Law on Local Self-Government allowing to hold all remaining 
2022 local elections on the same day. In July, the Constitutional Court assessed these 
amendments as unconstitutional. A credible, independent and effective institutional response 
to the so called ‘envelope affair’ remains to be ensured. 
The work of the Parliament has been marked by boycotts of the ruling majority and of the 
opposition, changes of governments and by the change of two consecutive Speakers in the 
process. The legislation-making process was significantly affected. There was no credible 
political dialogue and constructive engagement by political parties with a view to enhancing 
parliamentary accountability and government oversight. Government and Parliament 
cooperation should be further regulated to enhance Parliament’s participation in and 
oversight of the accession process.  
The Parliament continued to strengthen its transparency, by establishing several citizen-
oriented services. The capacity of Parliament to integrate and oversight gender equality issues 
needs to be enhanced.  
The role of civil society is recognised and promoted, although the current legal and 
institutional framework needs to be further improved to strengthen the consultation and 
cooperation mechanisms between state institutions and civil society in the context of the EU 
accession process. 
                                                            
1 This report covers the period from June 2021 to June 2022. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from the government of Montenegro, the EU Member States, European Parliament 
reports and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. This also includes the 
results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular on the rule of law. 
The report uses the following assessment scales to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of 
preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made 
during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some 
progress, good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have been used. 
 
5 
 
Montenegro is moderately prepared as regards public administration reform. Overall, 
limited progress was made, including the adoption of the new 2022-2026 strategy for public 
administration reform. Conversely, the effects of the reorganisation of the public 
administration and the amendments to the Law on civil servants and state employees adopted 
in 2021 continued to be felt, with staff changes, a loss of know-how on EU accession 
process-related matters and an overall slowing of the pace of reforms. The lowered 
requirements introduced by these amendments are a source of continuing concern with regard 
to the merit-based recruitment, competence and independence of civil servants. Furthermore, 
draft amendments of the Law on local self-government would similarly lower such 
requirements at the local level. Amendments to the Law on access to information have yet to 
be adopted by Parliament. Effective lines of accountability within the administration are still 
to be established. Strong political will is needed to effectively address issues related to merit-
based recruitments, optimisation of the state administration and implementation of 
managerial accountability. 
Montenegro remains moderately prepared when it comes to its judicial system. Limited 
progress was achieved overall during the reporting period. The implementation of key 
judicial reforms remains stalled. Certain long-pending high-level judicial appointments took 
place, while several others, including at the Constitutional Court (for which a qualified 
majority in Parliament is required) are still pending. Concerns remain over the institutional 
performance and consolidation of independent Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils. The track 
record on judicial accountability remains limited. The judiciary’s effective independence, 
integrity, accountability and professionalism need to be further strengthened, including by 
implementing the relevant constitutional and legal framework and by adopting legislative 
changes in line with European standards. The judiciary’s efficiency also needs to be 
strengthened. The adoption of a new strategy for the rationalisation of the judicial network is 
still pending, as is the implementation of the ICT strategy for the judiciary. Montenegro 
continues to make progress on the domestic handling of war crimes.  
Montenegro has achieved some level of preparation in the fight against corruption. Limited 
progress was achieved during the reporting period, with last year’s recommendations only 
partially met. The track record on prevention of corruption further improved, in particular due 
to the positive trend in the work of the Anti-Corruption Agency. However, more needs to be 
done to ensure the Agency’s integrity, impartiality and accountability, and to improve its 
tangible results and public trust, in line with the recommendations of the peer review mission 
conducted in 2021. To demonstrate a credible criminal justice response, Montenegro still 
must improve its track record of investigations, prosecutions and final convictions in the fight 
against corruption, including high-level corruption. Furthermore, the legal and insitutional 
framework must be improved in line with the EU acquis and European standards, including 
for the effective use of financial investigations and and asset seizure and confiscation in such 
cases. The sectors most vulnerable to corruption require targeted risk assessments and 
dedicated action.  
In the fight against organised crime, Montenegro has some level of preparation/is 
moderately prepared. Some progress was made in addressing last year’s recommendations, in 
particular as regards the efficiency of criminal investigations. The full use of special 
investigative measures was restored. Legislative changes introduced safeguards against 
political influence over the appointment or dismissal of the Head of the police. A register of 
beneficial ownership was created. The administrative framework on firearms was improved 
and a new strategy on the prevention of terrorism, money laundering and the financing of 
terrorism was adopted. Some key figures in organised crime groups were arrested and another 
record of drug seizures was reached. The first joint investigation team with a third country 
 
6 
 
was launched. The number of final convictions in organised crime cases is on the rise. 
However, the track record of court decisions on tobacco smuggling and money laundering, 
the use of financial investigations and the capacity to confiscate the proceeds of crime needs 
to be strengthened. Montenegro has yet to address some systemic deficiencies that exist 
across the board in its criminal justice system, including the way organised crime cases are 
handled in courts. This will require a more deterrent sentencing policy and a revision of the 
use of plea bargains in organised and serious crime cases. 
Montenegro is moderately prepared in the area of fundamental rights. The legislative and 
institutional framework is largely in place and Montenegro continues to meet its international 
obligations on human rights. However, additional efforts remain needed to implement it fully. 
On freedom of expression, Montenegro benefits from a pluralistic media environment and 
has achieved some level of preparation. Limited progress was made on last year’s 
recommendations. The legal framework on the protection of journalists and other media 
workers was improved thanks to the adoption of amendments to the Criminal Code laying 
down more stringent penalties against attacks and threats against journalists and obstructing 
or preventing them from performing their work. However, the lack of effective judicial 
follow-up on important old cases remains a matter of serious concern. The revision of the 
legal framework and the drafting of a new media strategy remain pending, in order to ensure 
their mutual consistency and full alignment with the EU acquis and relevant European 
standards. Sustained efforts are needed to counter disinformation and limit the effects of 
online harassment and hate speech, without disproportionately limiting freedom of 
expression. The public broadcaster RTCG continued to produce politically balanced and 
diverse content. Deep political polarisation of the media scene persisted, while growing 
competition from big regional media placed additional strain on the local media market. 
On the economic criteria, Montenegro has made good progress and is moderately 
prepared in developing a functioning market economy. After experiencing a sharp recession 
in 2020, the economy recorded a strong rebound in 2021 and kept growing at a steady pace in 
the first half of 2022 as the removal of COVID-19 restrictions buoyed both domestic and 
external demand. The recovery led to surging revenues and a very large improvement in the 
budget balance. The fallout from Russia’s war against Ukraine has been limited so far, 
despite these two countries’ very significant contribution to Montenegro’s tourism in the past. 
Driven by surging global commodity prices, inflation increased significantly. The 
government adopted an ambitious fiscal reform programme (called ‘Europe Now’) to support 
the post-pandemic recovery and provided fiscal stimulus measures easing the burden on 
households from rising energy and food prices. External imbalances decreased significantly 
thanks to the rebound of tourism, while the state of the labour market started to improve, even 
if structural problems persist. The banking system remained stable and non-performing loans 
did not increase significantly in 2022 after the expiry in 2021 of the loan moratorium adopted 
in the context of the COVID-19 crisis. 
Montenegro has made some progress and is moderately prepared to cope with competitive 
pressure and market forces within the EU. The last two governments worked to improve 
innovation capacities and to set the basis for a green and digital transition in an effort to 
diversify Montenegro’s narrow production. In particular, modern telecommunications and 
ambitious green energy projects are being deployed. However, infrastructure gaps persist, as 
the country’s administrative and financial capacities to implement major public investments 
remains limited. The education system still faces numerous challenges over a chronic 
shortage of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) graduates. In addition, 
the low value added of domestic products, the small size of local companies and low level of 
 
7 
 
participation in exports represent obstacles for increasing the productivity and 
competitiveness of local firms. 
On good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation, Montenegro generally maintains 
good bilateral relations with other enlargement countries in the region and with neighbouring 
EU Member States, marked by continued cooperation and several high-level visits. Relations 
with Serbia remain challenging but both sides are signalling more willingness to reset 
relations and work toward adressing open issues. In general, Montenegro actively participates 
in regional cooperation. 
On Montenegro’s ability to assume the obligations of EU membership, the country 
continued the work on alignment with the EU acquis in many areas, however overall the 
progress made was limited. 
The cluster on the internal market is key for Montenegro’s preparations for the EU’s 
requirements in this area and is of high relevance for early integration and the development of 
the Common Regional Market. All nine chapters are open, with closing benchmarks that 
remain to be fulfilled in each chapter. Progress was achieved in several areas within the 
cluster, particularly on: (i) market surveillance, accreditation and standardisation; (ii) 
stepping up the Employment Agency’s capacity on the European network of employment 
services; (iii) continued alignment with the Services Directive; (iv) legislation on accounting; 
(v) acquis alignment on intellectual property rights and (vi) State aid transparency and 
ordering recovery of unlawful State aid. The stability of Montenegro’s banking sector also 
advanced, as did legislative alignment on consumer protection and the adoption of 
implementing legislation on health protection.  
The competitiveness and inclusive growth cluster and the reforms concerned have 
significant links to Montenegro’s economic reform programme. All eight chapters are open, 
with closing benchmarks set in all but two, namely Chapters 25 (science and research) and 26 
(education and culture) both of which are provisionally closed. Closing benchmarks remain 
to be fulfilled in each of the other six chapters. Some progress was achieved in various areas, 
namely on the alignment with the Broadband Cost Reduction Directive, on tax legislation and 
on administrative cooperation and mutual assistance. There was also progress on further 
implementation of the revised industrial policy. By contrast, there was slow progress on 
preparations for accession to the Convention on a Common Transit Procedure, on 
implementing actions envisaged in the 2018-2022 trade facilitation strategy, and on 
implementing the action plan for alignment with the EU acquis on economic and monetary 
policies. 
The green agenda and sustainable connectivity cluster is at the heart of the Green Agenda 
for the Western Balkans and closely linked to Montenegro’s economic reform programme 
and the Commission’s Economic and Investment Plan. All four chapters are open, with 
closing benchmarks that remain to be fulfilled in each chapter. Some progress was achieved 
on creating a functioning day-ahead energy market and on preparing for membership of the 
Paris Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control. There was limited progress on 
the review and implementation of the transport development strategy; on water management 
and by improved climate change reporting. 
The cluster on resources, agriculture and cohesion comprises policies linked to EU 
structural funds and to developing capacity to assume the responsibilities of a future Member 
State. It also comprises some of the key policy areas crucial for ensuring sustainable food 
systems and helping rural communities to develop and diversify economically. All five 
chapters are open, with closing benchmarks that remain to be fulfilled in each chapter.