2 
 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION  
1.1.  
CONTEXT 
Accession negotiations with Montenegro were opened in June 2012. To date 33, negotiating 
chapters have been opened, of which three have been provisionally closed. Montenegro 
accepted the revised enlargement methodology focusing on: fundamental reforms, stronger 
political steer, increased dynamism and predictability of the process. Montenegro continued to 
broadly implement the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) and meetings of the 
joint bodies under the agreement took place at regular intervals. 
Overall progress in the accession negotiations depends on progress in the area of rule of law, 
as per the requirements set out in the Negotiating Framework as well as the revised 
methodology formally accepted by Montenegro in the Intergovernmental Conference held on 
22 June 2021. Progress towards meeting the interim benchmarks set in the rule of law 
Chapters 23 and 24 will be key to achieve further progress in the negotiations overall, no 
further chapters will be provisionally closed before this milestone is reached.  
The political commitment of the Montenegrin authorities to the strategic goal of European 
integration has been consistently stated as the key priority for the country during a rather 
challenging reporting period as the COVID-19 pandemic continued throughout the period. By 
September 2021, Montenegro had recorded around 131,500 cases and about 1940 deaths 
related to the pandemic, around 33% of the population had been fully vaccinated. Though the 
final extent of impact in terms of loss of human lives and damage to the economies is still 
difficult to assess, it is clear that the necessary restrictions imposed in the context of the 
pandemic took a heavy toll, notably on tourism-dependent economy of Montenegro, which is 
the worst affected country in the region. The EU continued to provide essential and 
unparalleled support. This includes financial support: a substantial package of EUR 53 
Million of non-repayable financial aid and EUR 60 Million of favourable loans as macro-
financial assistance to address the immediate health crisis, in addition to delivering vast 
quantities of health supplies and equipment, as well as EUR 200,000 allocation under the EU 
Solidarity Fund. The EU and its Member States have also supported the country’s vaccination 
campaign by providing over 262,000 doses by early September, which is a sign of concrete 
EU solidarity.  
1.2.  
SUMMARY OF THE REPORT1 2 
Concerning the political criteria, the reporting period was marked by tensions and mistrust 
between political actors. The deep polarisation between the new ruling majority and the 
opposition persisted throughout 2020 and intensified in the post-election period. Heated 
relations and mistrust fed frequent escalations and further exacerbated political divisions, 
including within the ruling majority. The Parliamentary elections resulted in a change of the 
                                                          
1 This report covers the period from June 2020 to June 2021. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from the government of Montenegro, the EU Member States, European Parliament 
reports and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. This also includes the 
results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of 
law. 
2 For the state of play the report uses the following assessment scales: early stage, some level of preparation, 
moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. For progress made during the reporting 
period, the following scale has been used: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, good 
progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, also interim steps have been used. 
 
 
3 
 
ruling coalition and transformed the dynamics between organs of the state and demonstrated a 
need to find a balance in the new political landscape, including on questions concerning 
religious communities and ethnicity, which dominated the political agenda during the 
reporting period. Friction between the executive and legislative powers has slowed down 
reform work. In December 2020, Parliament elected the 42nd government of Montenegro, the 
number of ministries was substantially reduced. It is the first government in Montenegro 
composed mostly of non-politically affiliated experts. 
In its final report on the 2020 Parliamentary elections, the OSCE Office for Democratic 
Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) limited election observation mission recommended a 
comprehensive reform to harmonise the electoral legal framework and regulate all key aspects 
of elections, through an inclusive process, well in advance of the next elections. In December 
2020, the Parliament established the committee on comprehensive electoral reform, tasked to 
deliver legislative reforms by the end of 2021. Progress has been slow due to initial delays 
and periodic boycotts. Parliament dismissed the President of the State Electoral Commission 
(SEC) in June 2021, appointment of a new President is still pending in the Parliament. 
Continued efforts are needed to enhance professionalism, transparency and accountability of 
the SEC. 
In 2021, local elections took place in two municipalities. Despite cross-party agreement to 
hold all local elections on the same day, the legal framework still provides for their conduct 
on a rolling basis, leading to nearly constant pre-electoral campaigning at national and local 
level. A credible, independent and effective institutional response to the so-called ‘envelope 
affair’ remains to be ensured. 
The lack of constructive engagement of all parliamentary actors prevented a meaningful 
political dialogue, further polarising the political landscape. The boycott of plenary sessions 
by majority of MPs, from the opposition and the ruling majority caused a suspension of 
decision-making in Parliament in 2021. Parliament improved the transparency of its work, 
communicating with the public and stepped up its legislative and oversight role overall.  
The ruling majority frequently initiated or passed legislation through the fast-track procedure, 
without necessary public consultations and without duly taking into account EU accession 
requirements. Parliament is yet to demonstrate in practice its commitment to Montenegro's 
EU reform agenda and improve coordination with the government on legislative initiatives. 
Parliament should strengthen the professional and expert capacity of its administrative staff 
and improve women's political representation. 
The composition of the current Parliament is unprecedented in Montenegro’s history. It 
should endeavour to find a broad cross-party and societal consensus on EU-related reforms, 
which is vital for the country to make progress on its EU path. It is clear that active and 
constructive participation by all parties is required to enhance parliamentary accountability, 
oversight of the executive, democratic scrutiny, to improve the quality of legislation and for 
key appointments. So far, the Parliament was not able to secure the required 2/3 majority for 
important judicial appointments and therefore key functions of the judicial system are still 
filled on acting bases. 
As regards governance, there is a need to strengthen stakeholders' participation, and the 
government's capacity to implement reforms. In December 2020, Parliament elected the 42nd 
government of Montenegro. The number of ministries was reduced to 12; women head four of 
them. The new government composition is the first expert government in Montenegro, only 
the position of Deputy Prime Minister is held by a political party leader. The government also 
adopted a new national programme for EU accession for the period 2021-2023. The 
negotiation structure was substantially weakened by the resignation or dismissal of 110 of its 
 
4 
 
members, including 16 chapter negotiators and 24 heads of working groups. Most of these 
key positions remain vacant. Some key ministries failed to show sufficient commitment and 
constructive engagement in the EU accession process under their new leadership.  
The role of civil society is recognised and promoted, however the current legal and 
institutional framework needs to be further improved to strengthen the consultation and 
cooperation mechanisms between state institutions and the civil society in the context of the 
EU accession process. 
Montenegro is moderately prepared on the reform of its public administration. Overall, 
limited progress was made in the reporting period. The change of government and of the 
parliamentary majority severely affected the civil service: amendments to the Law on Civil 
Servants and State Employees lowered the requirements for competence, independence and 
merit-based recruitment of civil servants. Moreover, the recent reorganisations of public 
administration led to substantial staff changes, including at senior levels, jeopardising 
Montenegro’s capacity to retain experienced staff in EU-accession process related matters in 
many sectors. Strong political will is needed to effectively depoliticise the public service, 
optimise the state administration and implement managerial accountability. 
Montenegro remains moderately prepared to apply the EU acquis and European standards in 
the area of judiciary and fundamental rights and has made limited progress overall, with 
limited track record on accountability. No progress has been made in the area of the judiciary 
and the implementation of key judicial reforms is stagnating. The decisive political 
commitment needed to unblock important segments of those reforms is still outstanding, with 
a number of appointments to the judiciary remaining pending in Parliament due to the 
inability to secure a qualified majority. Despite a more proactive approach of the Anti-
Corruption Agency, corruption remains prevalent in many areas and an issue of concern. On 
fundamental rights, Montenegro continued meeting obligations from international human 
rights instruments and legislation However challenges remain in ensuring that national 
legislation on human rights is implemented effectively. There was limited progress in the area 
of freedom of expression. 
Montenegro has achieved some level of preparation in the fight against corruption. It made 
limited progress, with last year’s recommendations partially met with regard to further results 
on track records on repression and prevention of corruption and the efforts of the Anti-
Corruption Agency to address its challenges. Track record on seizure and confiscation of 
assets needs to be further improved. The Anti-Corruption Agency (ACA) under new 
management demonstrated a more proactive approach, especially in stepping up its 
communication and outreach activities towards the general public, media and civil society and 
in addressing the caseload pending from previous years. Despite this positive trend, 
challenges related to Agency’s independence, priority-setting, selective approach and the 
quality of its decisions remain and require sustained efforts in this respect. Corruption remains 
prevalent in many areas. There is a need for strong political will to effectively address this 
issue, as well as a robust criminal justice response to high-level corruption. 
Montenegro has some level of preparation/is moderately prepared in the fight against 
organised crime. It made some progress in addressing last year’s recommendations, in 
particular in improving access for law-enforcement agencies to key databases and increasing 
the number of investigators and experts in key areas. The number of organised crime cases 
investigated and prosecuted continued to grow, and the number of cases adjudicated at courts 
nearly tripled. International police cooperation is well established and continued to yield 
results, with unprecedented drug seizures abroad. However, the capacity to address tobacco 
smuggling and money laundering is not yet at the expected level. Montenegro still needs to 
 
5 
 
address some systemic deficiencies in its criminal justice system, including the way organised 
crime cases are handled in the courts. 
On fundamental rights, Montenegro largely has the legislative and institutional framework 
in place and made some progress in meeting the obligations laid down in international human 
rights instruments and legislation. However, challenges remain in effective implementation. 
The efficiency of investigations into the excessive use of force by law-enforcement and hate 
crimes needs to improve further. Vulnerable groups, including Roma and Egyptians, and 
persons with disabilities continue to experience multiple forms of discrimination and 
difficulties in enforcing their rights in administrative and judicial proceedings. Women 
continue to experience inequality in participating in political and public life and accessing 
employment and economic opportunities. Gender-based violence and violence against 
children remain issues of serious concern. Incidents of ethnically and religiously motivated 
attacks, hate crimes and hate speech continued to rise. Montenegro has only partially 
addressed last year’s recommendations. Access to justice, in particular for vulnerable groups 
remains to be improved. The amendments to the Law on Freedom of Religion of Belief were 
adopted after limited, and not fully inclusive, consultations with religious communities. 
Montenegro has achieved some level of preparation in the area of freedom of expression. 
Overall, it made limited progress during the reporting period and only partially addressed last 
year’s recommendations. There were some new developments on investigation into the 2018 
shooting of an investigative journalist, but full and effective judicial follow-up both to this 
case and to other important old cases, remains to be ensured. In April 2021, the government 
established a new ad hoc commission for monitoring violence against the media, but it has not 
yet fully or effectively addressed the significant recommendations made by the previous 
commission. A revision of the legal framework is ongoing, to address the additional issues 
identified in the 2020 law on media and the law on public broadcaster RTCG, to complete it 
with a new law on audio-visual media, and ensure their full alignment with the EU acquis and 
European standards. More efforts are required to limit the effects of disinformation and on-
line harassment and hate speech, while ensuring that such measures do not limit 
disproportionately freedom of expression. Parliament appointed the new RTCG Council in 
June 2021 without broad cross-party support. Following this change and the subsequent 
changes of RTCG management, the public broadcaster started to feature politically more 
diverse content. The media scene remains overall highly polarised, often marked by 
politically biased and unbalanced reporting, including extensive involvement of foreign media 
from the region, which was particularly notable during election periods. Self-regulatory 
mechanisms remain weak.  
On the economic criteria Montenegro has made some progress and is moderately prepared in 
developing a functioning market economy. The country experienced a sharp recession in 
2020 as the COVID-19 pandemic took a heavy toll on its tourism-dependent economy. This 
created large negative spill over effects on private consumption, investment, employment, 
trade and public finances. To support citizens and the economy, authorities implemented 
several economic support packages. These measures were, to a large extent, well targeted, 
transparent and of a temporary character. In spite of some delays due to the pandemic, the 
government continued implementing some of the envisaged reforms to improve the business 
environment. An orderly government transition in the middle of the crisis preserved the 
effectiveness of the COVID-19 policy response. The new government managed to mitigate 
fiscal risks by accumulating sizeable fiscal buffers to cover the 2021 financing needs, 
including for additional COVID-19 support programmes. The financial sector remained stable 
during the crisis, as a result of its strong pre-crisis position and the support measures 
 
6 
 
implemented by the authorities, but the delayed impact of the crisis on bank balance sheets 
calls for close monitoring of the financial institutions. 
Montenegro has made some progress and is moderately prepared to cope with competitive 
pressure and market forces within the EU. The COVID-19 pandemic demonstrated that 
lack of diversification makes Montenegro’s tourism-dependent economy highly vulnerable to 
shocks. Some efforts have been made to improve innovation capacities and to introduce EU 
standards at local companies thanks to public grants, but these remain modest given the scale 
of the challenge. The quality of the educational system and curricula preferences appear 
inadequate to raise human capital and address skill mismatches. Modern telecommunication 
and energy infrastructure is being deployed rapidly, but there is a substantial deficit in 
transport infrastructure, hindering integration with regional and EU markets. In addition, the 
low level of sophistication of domestic products, the small size of local companies and low 
level of participation in external markets represent major obstacles for increasing 
competitiveness and diversifying the economy. 
With regard to good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation, Montenegro 
remained constructively committed to bilateral relations with other enlargement countries and 
neighbouring EU Member States, albeit bilateral relations with Serbia were marred by 
tensions, as nationalistic rhetoric increased. Montenegro is generally an active participant in 
regional cooperation.  
Concerning Montenegro's ability to assume the obligations of membership, important work 
on alignment and preparation for the implementation of the EU acquis has taken place in 
many areas, albeit at a slower pace than previously.  
The internal market cluster is key for Montenegro’s preparations to meet the requirements of 
the EU’s internal market and is of high relevance for possible early integration measures and 
the development of the Common Regional Market. Progress was achieved on market 
surveillance, accreditation and standardisation; electronic company registration legislative 
prerequisites; prevention of money laundering and terrorist financing; company law; state aid 
and aid transparency; banking; consumer and health protection. Montenegro should now 
focus on: alignment with the EU acquis governing metrology and standardisation, develop the 
operational capacity of the Employment Agency; regulated professions, capital movements 
and payments, including on the acquisition of property rights, phasing out its investor 
citizenship scheme; company law and corporate accounting; intellectual property; competition 
and State aid; consumer protection and health protection and on implementing the laws 
aligning with the capital requirements EU acquis in the banking sector.  
The competitiveness and inclusive growth cluster has significant links to Montenegro’s 
Economic Reform Programme. Progress was made on tobacco control; pensions; industrial 
policy, smart specialisation, vocational education and training, and trade facilitation. On 
economic and monetary policy, work to implement the action plan for alignment with the EU 
acquis is ongoing. Montenegro should now focus on: independence of the media sector; VAT, 
excise duties and direct taxation coordination of economic and monetary issues; labour law 
and the anti-discrimination law, safety at work; industrial policy, research and innovation, 
education and training and EU-compatible computerised transit system. 
The green agenda and sustainable connectivity cluster has significant links to 
Montenegro’s Economic Reform Programme, the Commission’s Economic and Investment 
Plan and the Green Agenda for the Western Balkans. Progress was made in creating a day-
ahead energy market; Transport Development Strategy, nature protection and the National 
Energy and Climate Plan. Montenegro should now focus on: the energy sector; trans-
 
7 
 
European networks, telecommunications, TEN-T and TEN-E Regulations; green transition, 
waste management, water quality, nature protection and climate change. 
Resources, agriculture and cohesion cluster comprises policies linked to EU Structural 
funds and Investment funds and developing the capacities to assume responsibilities of a 
future EU Member State. Progress was made in agriculture, food and fisheries, regional 
policy and structural instruments, financial and budgetary provisions and management of own 
resources. Montenegro should now focus on: implementation of the IPARD programme, 
agriculture and rural development as well as fisheries, upgrading food establishments and 
food safety controls, EU cohesion policy requirements, capacity for the handling of indirect 
management programmes in IPA and rules of administration for the own resources system.  
On the external relations cluster, Montenegro continued to fully align with all EU CFSP 
positions, declarations and EU common positions. It also continued to implement actions 
under the common regional market based on EU rules, including through cooperation within 
CEFTA and the Regional Cooperation Council. Alignment to the integrity of the Rome 
Statute would allow the provisional closure of the remaining open chapter 31 under this 
cluster.  
Strengthening the administrative capacity to apply the EU acquis remains an important 
challenge for Montenegro, including the urgent need to re-construct a functional negotiating 
structure.  
On migration, both legal and irregular migration fell sharply in 2020 against the backdrop of 
the COVID-19 pandemic. The arrival of irregular migrants fell by 60% compared with 2019, 
with 3149 migrants apprehended in 2020. The Special Prosecutor’s Office conducted two 
investigations into migrant smuggling in 2020. In one case, final convictions were issued 
against eight individuals. Although Montenegro’s capacity to manage mixed migration flows 
and the integration of refugees is improving, sustained efforts are required in order for the 
country to cope with migratory pressure, by further increasing its reception capacity and 
raising standards in the reception centres. This will also include developing further its 
international cooperation on readmission, supporting the successful reintegration of returnees, 
increasing its capacity to prosecute migrant smuggling networks, and setting up a modern 
migrants’ data collection system. 
 
1.3 STATE OF PLAY OF THE ACCESSION NEGOTIATIONS  
CLUSTERS 
Chapters / areas  
Date chapter opened / closed 
with  interim or closing 
benchmarks   
Fundamentals 
 
All chapters open 
23-Judiciary and fundamental rights  
24-Justice, freedom, security  
  5-Public Procurement  
18-Statistics  
32-Financial control 
…Economic Criteria 
…Functioning of democratic Institutions  
…PAR 
December 2013  
December 2013  
December 2013  
December 2014 
June 2014  
 
- 
- 
Internal Market 
 
All chapters open 
 1-Free movement of goods   
 2-Freedom of movement for workers   
 3-Right of establishment and freedom to  
     establish services  
 4-Free movement of capital 
June 2017  
December 2017  
December 2017  
… 
June 2014