3 
 
1.  
INTRODUCTION 
1.1.  
CONTEXT 
The first intergovernmental conference on accession negotiations with North Macedonia took 
place in July 2022. At the same time, the first step in the accession negotiations process was 
taken with the launch of the analytical examination of the EU acquis, the ‘screening’. This 
has progressed smoothly. North Macedonia continued to implement the Stabilisation and 
Association Agreement and the joint bodies under the agreement met at regular intervals. 
The EU accession negotiation process with North Macedonia is conducted in line with the 
revised enlargement methodology, and with the requirements set out in the Negotiating 
Framework, which have an even stronger focus on the fundamentals (cluster 1) of the 
accession process. 
The authorities have continued to demonstrate and to declare publicly their commitment to 
advancing on their EU path. Now that the accession negotiations process has begun, the pace 
of EU-related reforms needs to pick up. 
North Macedonia has also fully aligned with the EU positions on Russia’s war of aggression 
against Ukraine, sending a strong signal of its strategic choice of EU accession and showing 
itself once more to be a reliable partner. In 2023, North Macedonia has played an active role 
in a complex geopolitical context during its term as chair of the Organisation for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The impact of Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, 
including high energy, commodity and food prices and disruptions in supply chains, has 
weighed heavily on the economy and seriously affected vulnerable households and small and 
medium-sized enterprises. 
1.2.  
SUMMARY OF THE REPORT1 
The reporting period was marked by the start of the EU accession negotiations process, 
including the screening process. The political situation remained polarised, which had an 
impact on the proper functioning of democratic institutions. 
On the political criteria, North Macedonia continued its efforts to strengthen democracy, 
while it faced significant challenges in the area of the rule of law. Overall, the legal 
framework remains conducive to the holding of democratic elections in North Macedonia. 
However, no progress was made to address and implement the outstanding recommendations 
by the OSCE's Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights and the Venice 
Commission. As mentioned repeatedly in previous reports, electoral legislation should be 
comprehensively reviewed to address inconsistencies in a timely, inclusive and transparent 
manner. 
Parliament’s work was marred by political polarisation, which deepened further, delaying the 
adoption of many reform laws and important appointments. The EU accession negotiation 
process requires broad consensus of major political parties. All parties need to start engaging 
in a constructive and inclusive political debate, to strengthen the role of Parliament. 
 
1 This report covers the period from June 2022 to June 2023. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from the government of North Macedonia, the EU Member States, European Parliament 
reports and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also includes the 
results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in rule of law. 
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of 
preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made 
during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some 
progress, good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been used. 
 
4 
 
Parliament and government committed to launch and achieve as a matter of priority the 
relevant constitutional changes, with a view to including in the Constitution citizens who live 
within the borders of the state and who are part of other peoples, such as Bulgarians. 
Excessive and sometimes inappropriate use was made of fast-track procedures and of the ‘EU 
flag’ procedure, in some cases due to the lack of consultations and poor planning of the 
legislative calendar. The ‘EU flag’ should be used when directly linked to the adoption of 
laws whose main goal is aligning with the EU acquis, and not to short-cut public debate on 
important issues. Parliamentary oversight of the executive was regularly exercised through 
parliamentary questions to ministers. Parties should spare no efforts in meeting long-overdue 
commitments for internal reform dating from the third round of the ‘Jean Monnet Dialogue’ 
in early 2020. Work continued on establishing criminal responsibility for those who 
orchestrated or committed violence in the attack on Parliament on 27 April 2017. Prompt 
implementation of recommendations by the Group of States against Corruption is required to 
increase the transparency of funding for political parties. Parliament should ensure the timely 
review of the statutory reports sent to it by state agencies and bodies. 
Overall, civil society organisations (CSOs) in North Macedonia continue to operate in an 
enabling environment. However, the government should increase its efforts to mainstream 
civil society engagement in priority areas and consultation activities. CSOs should play an 
important  role in the reform process and be involved in decision-making processes. Existing 
legal and financial frameworks still need to be amended and implemented in practice, notably 
to provide consistent mechanisms for awarding public funding to CSOs. There is a need for 
the Council for Cooperation between the Government and Civil Society to resume its 
activities. 
The country needs to strengthen its capacity for parliamentary oversight of the intelligence 
services. 
North Macedonia remains moderately prepared in terms of public administration reform. 
Limited progress was made in the reporting period with the adoption of the new public 
administration reform strategy and the accompanying action plan in July 2023. Despite 
having started the process five years ago, the country still has not adopted the revised 
legislative framework for human resources management, which includes the revised Law on 
administrative servants, the Law on public sector employees and new legal provisions on top-
level management. The new framework should improve human resource management across 
the administration and help ensure merit-based recruitments, promotions, and dismissals at all 
levels, including senior management. Legislation has not yet taken on board the State 
Commission for the Prevention of Corruption’s recommendations on nepotism, cronyism, 
and political influence in the recruitment of public sector employees and in the appointment 
of members of supervisory and management boards. Improvements in accountability in the 
public administration are undermined by the failure to adopt the new Law on state 
organisation. There are ongoing efforts to improve delivery of services to citizens and 
businesses. 
The judicial system of North Macedonia is in between some and moderate level of 
preparation. There was no progress on the judiciary during the reporting period. The Judicial 
Council should strive to protect the integrity and independence of judges and institutions and 
should resist any external influence. The controversial dismissal of the President of the 
Judicial Council raised concerns about undue political influence. The adoption of a new 
judicial reform strategy aimed at improving the performance of institutions is behind 
schedule. Progress on implementation of the human resource strategies for the judiciary and 
prosecution services was limited. The lack of measures to address the impact of scheduled 
 
5 
 
retirements affected efficiency. Most promotions for higher courts faced further delays. Work 
continued on upgrading the automated court case management information system for 
random distribution of cases in courts. A similar system was introduced in the Public 
Prosecutor’s Office. 
The country is in between some and moderate level of preparation in the prevention and 
fight against corruption. No progress was made. Corruption remains prevalent in many 
areas and is an issue of concern. Delays and reversals in trials of high-level corruption cases 
increased, resulting in some cases in the expiration of the statute of limitations. The Criminal 
Code was amended through an expedited parliamentary procedure. The maximum legal 
penalties for specific corruption-related criminal offences were reduced, having implications 
on the application of the statute of limitations and affecting, halting or even terminating a 
large number of high-level corruption cases, including from the former Special Public 
Prosecutor’s Office (SPO). The amendments also hamper the authorities’ ability to 
investigate and prosecute such offences. This is a matter of serious concern. 
The State Commission for the Prevention of Corruption was proactive in providing public 
institutions with policy guidance on preventing corruption. It opened several cases, but its 
recommendations need to be followed up. Efforts to improve the functioning of the SCPC 
should continue, especially by allocating additional funding for the recruitment of specialist 
staff. Additional human and financial resources should also be made available to the Public 
Prosecution Office, investigative centres and law enforcements units in charge of 
investigating corruption. The sectors most vulnerable to corruption require targeted risk 
assessments and dedicated actions.  
North Macedonia has some level of preparation in the fight against organised crime. Some 
progress was made during the reporting period. The country continues to have a good level of 
operational cooperation with EU Members States, non-EU neighbouring countries, Europol 
and Eurojust. A new Law on money laundering and financing of terrorism entered into force 
in July 2022. Implementing legislation now needs to be drafted and adopted promptly. More 
needs to be done to improve the effectiveness of law enforcement in fighting certain forms of 
crime, such as money laundering and financial crimes. North Macedonia needs to adopt and 
implement the necessary legislation to regulate the activity of the Asset Recovery Office. The 
capacity of the National Coordination Centre for the Fight against Organised Crime needs to 
be improved. Coordination remains crucial for all stakeholders involved in fighting organised 
crime, including between prosecutors and police.  
Some progress was made in the fight against terrorism and violent extremism in line with 
the objectives set out in the joint action plan on counterterrorism for the Western Balkans and 
the new bilateral implementing arrangement. The national strategies for countering terrorism 
(2023-2027) and countering violent extremism (2023-2027) were adopted in May 2023, with 
the related action plans. 
North Macedonia is on one of the main transit routes for migration movements. The country 
continues to play an active role in the management of mixed migration flows. Efforts 
continued to ensure basic living conditions and services for all migrants in the country. There 
is, however, a need to enhance institutional and administrative capacities for all aspects of 
migration management. More staff and additional material and technical resources are 
required to increase capacity to a satisfactory level. Systematic registration of migrants is 
needed, and protection-sensitive profiling needs to be improved. The country should establish 
a proper system for managing irregular movement and stop the practice of returning migrants 
outside a legal framework. A contingency plan to manage large migratory flows needs to be 
finalised and adopted. The Status Agreement for operational cooperation in border 
 
6 
 
management with the European Border and Coast Guard Agency (Frontex) entered into force 
on 1 April 2023, allowing the launch of a joint operation with the deployment of officers 
from EU Member States to provide support with border control and the management of 
irregular migration and cross-border crime. 
The legal framework on the protection of fundamental rights is partially aligned with the 
EU acquis and standards on fundamental rights. The country continues to meet its general 
obligations on fundamental rights, but the legislation should be implemented in a more 
systematic manner. Some significant amendments to the Criminal Code were adopted in 
February 2023, regulating criminal acts of gender-based violence. Parliament should make 
appointments to independent and regulatory bodies based on merit. The functional 
independence of human rights bodies must be guaranteed at all times. This means, amongst 
other things, allocating sufficient funds. Services for victims of gender-based violence still 
need reinforcement and proper funding to meet the standards laid down by the Istanbul 
Convention. Persons with disabilities continue to face direct and indirect discrimination, 
social exclusion and barriers. The Ombudsman’s Office and the Commission for the 
Prevention and Protection against Discrimination signed a memorandum of understanding to 
formalise their coordination. The situation in prisons is still dire. The recommendations made 
by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture on the treatment of detained and 
convicted persons were not addressed, which is a matter of serious concern. Detention 
conditions should be improved with the utmost urgency. Special attention should be given to 
promoting non-discrimination, increasing effectiveness in addressing hate crime and hate 
speech and strengthening the capacity and independence of institutions in charge of 
protecting the rights of persons belonging to minorities or communities. The Agency for 
Community Rights Realisation needs to receive sufficient funding to further promote the 
protection of minorities and the implementation of the national ‘One Society for All and 
Interculturalism’ strategy. The capacity of law enforcement and criminal justice officials to 
effectively prevent and prosecute all instances of violence, hate crimes and hate speech needs 
to be enhanced. The external oversight mechanism for the police, including the prison police, 
is still not fully functional, with the three CSOs representatives still to be selected by the 
Parliament.  The enacted amendments to the Law on civil registry pave the way to resolving 
cases of statelessness and fulfilling the country’s international obligations. 
North Macedonia is in between some and moderate level of preparation in the area of 
freedom of expression. Overall, it made limited progress. The general context is favourable 
to media freedom and allows for critical media reporting. The amended Criminal Code and 
Law on civil liability for defamation raised the overall level legal protection for journalists. 
However, a number of attacks, threats and some intimidating behaviour towards journalists 
were noted. Greater transparency is needed regarding media advertising by state institutions 
and political parties. Reform of the public service broadcaster is required to strengthen its 
independence, professional standards and financial sustainability. Since December 2018, 
Parliament has been delaying the appointment of the public service broadcaster’s 
programming council and media regulator’s council. Working conditions for journalists 
remain challenging. 
On the economic criteria, North Macedonia has made some progress and is at a good level 
of preparation in developing a functioning market economy. In 2022, the economy was badly 
hit by the fallout from Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, which significantly 
slowed down its post-COVID-19 recovery. The government supported households and 
businesses through large-scale energy subsidies, tax reductions and targeted direct income 
support. Owing to an inflation-driven boost to tax income and under-execution of several 
 
7 
 
expenditure categories, the general government deficit remained below the revised target. 
Capital expenditure was raised significantly, but still fell short of the revised plan. The public 
debt ratio dropped but remains significantly above pre-COVID-19 levels. The central bank 
tightened its policy stance further in view of still elevated inflationary pressures, which began 
to subside gradually towards the end of 2022 and beyond. The current account deficit rose 
substantially as energy import prices surged, but external financing needs were met with the 
help of market-based and IMF borrowing. The Organic Budget Law (OBL) adopted in 
September 2022 provides for the introduction of fiscal rules and a fiscal council, 
strengthening fiscal sustainability. However, progress has been slow in implementing wider-
ranging measures to improve the management of public investment, vital for underpinning 
the government’s plans for a sizeable increase in capital expenditure. The banking sector was 
resilient throughout the crises. The labour market showed some improvement, but structural 
problems persist, including high youth and long-term unemployment and a large gender gap. 
The business environment continued to be impeded by the large size of the informal 
economy, slow progress in streamlining parafiscal charges and an untransparent and 
inefficient State aid regime. 
North Macedonia has made some progress and is moderately prepared to cope with 
competitive pressure and market forces within the EU. Integration with the EU in trade 
and investment remained at a high level in 2022. The share of high-value products in exports 
increased further and trade openness surged to a record high. There was further progress in 
improving vocational educational training, but major skills shortages persist relative to labour 
market needs, entailing long school-to-work transitions. These, coupled with large gaps in 
transport and energy infrastructure, low investment and low innovation funding, are 
restricting potential growth. Digitalisation of the economy is advancing, but the 
competitiveness of domestic businesses could be improved through a wider offering of public 
e-Services. 
As regards its ability to assume the obligations of membership, North Macedonia is 
moderately prepared in most of the areas covered by cluster 2 on the internal market, 
namely the free movement of goods, services and capital, intellectual property, competition 
policy, financial services and consumer and health protection. The country has achieved a 
good level of preparation on company law, although it is still at an early stage on freedom of 
movement for workers. North Macedonia made good progress on free movement of capital 
and some progress on financial services and consumer and health protection. Limited 
progress was made on the free movement of goods, rights of establishment to provide 
services. No progress was made on company law, intellectual property law and competition 
policy and freedom of movement for workers. Overall, more progress is needed in the 
coming year in the areas covered by this cluster, to feed into North Macedonia's preparations 
to meet the requirements of the EU’s internal market. Work on this cluster is highly relevant 
for the development of the Common Regional Market.  
Overall, North Macedonia is moderately prepared in most of the areas covered by cluster 3 
on competitiveness and inclusive growth, including digital transformation and media, 
taxation,  social policy and employment, and enterprise and industrial policy. The country is 
in between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of economic and monetary 
policy. It has a good level of preparation in the areas of science and research and customs 
union. Some progress was made on taxation, economic and monetary policy, enterprise and 
industrial policy, science and research policy, social policy and employment. More efforts are 
needed, however, particularly in areas where limited progress was made, such as digital 
transformation and media, customs union, and education and culture. 
 
8 
 
On cluster 4 on the green agenda and sustainable connectivity, North Macedonia has a 
good level of preparation on trans-European networks and some level of preparation on 
environment and climate change. The country is moderately prepared on transport and energy 
policy with some progress made on energy, particularly on regional gas interconnectors and 
on renewables. Substantial efforts are needed in areas where limited progress was achieved, 
such as transport, trans-European networks and the protection of the environment. In the 
upcoming period, the country needs to accelerate implementation of the Economic and 
Investment Plan and of the Green Agenda for the Western Balkans2. 
North Macedonia is moderately prepared in most areas of cluster 5 on resources, 
agriculture and cohesion. It has a good level of preparation on food safety, veterinary and 
phytosanitary policy and is at an early stage of preparation in financial and budgetary 
provisions. Over the reporting period, some progress was made on agriculture and rural 
development, fisheries and food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy. However, further 
efforts are needed, in particular in areas where limited or no progress was made, such as 
regional policy and the coordination of structural instruments and financial and budgetary 
provisions. 
Concerning cluster 6 on external relations, North Macedonia is moderately prepared in the 
area of external relations and has reached a good level of preparation on the common foreign 
and security policy. The country made some progress during the reporting period on common 
commercial policy. It has made good progress by maintaining full alignment with EU 
common foreign and security policy. By doing so, North Macedonia has shown itself to be a 
reliable partner, including at international level.  
On regional cooperation, the country maintained good relations with other enlargement 
countries and continued its engagement in regional initiatives. Existing bilateral agreements 
need to be implemented in good faith by all parties, including the Prespa Agreement between 
North Macedonia and Greece and the Treaty of Friendship, Good-Neighbourliness and 
Cooperation with Bulgaria, including its protocols. 
1.3.  
STATE OF PLAY OF THE ACCESSION NEGOTIATIONS 
Following the political inter-governmental conference on accession negotiations with North 
Macedonia that took place on 19 July 2022, the Commission immediately launched the 
screening process, which is progressing smoothly. All sessions on Cluster 1 (Fundamentals) 
and Cluster 2 (Internal Market), Cluster 3 (Competitiveness and Inclusive Growth) and 
Cluster 4 (Green Agenda and Sustainable Connectivity) have taken place. Explanatory 
sessions on Cluster 5 (Resources, Agriculture and Cohesion) and Cluster 6 (External 
Relations) have been completed and bilateral sessions on these are ongoing. The remaining 
screening meetings are scheduled until December 2023. 
2. 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
2.1. 
FUNCTIONING OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 
REFORM 
2.1.1. Democracy 
The political situation remained polarised, which had an impact on the proper functioning of 
democratic institutions. 
 
2 COM(2020) 641 final