3 
 
1. INTRODUCTION1 
1.1. CONTEXT 
Following the first Intergovernmental Conference on accession negotiations on 19 July 
2022, the screening sessions for all six clusters were completed on 7 December 2023. North 
Macedonia continued to implement the Stabilisation and Association Agreement and the 
joint bodies under the agreement met. 
North Macedonia has consistently stated its political commitment to the strategic goal of EU 
integration and its ambition to move forward in the accession negotiations. The newly-
elected President took office in May 2024 and in June 2024, after the parliamentary 
elections, a new government was formed. Essential EU-related reforms need to be 
implemented. North Macedonia maintained good relations with other enlargement countries 
and continued its engagement in regional initiatives. Existing bilateral agreements with 
neighbouring countries need to be implemented in good faith by all parties, including the 
Prespa Agreement between North Macedonia and Greece and the Treaty of Friendship, 
Good Neighbourliness and Cooperation with Bulgaria.  
North Macedonia maintained its full alignment with the EU’s common foreign and security 
policy, including on Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, sending a strong signal of 
its strategic choice of EU accession and showing itself, once more, to be a reliable partner. 
In 2023, North Macedonia has played an active role in a complex geopolitical context during 
its term as chair of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).  
North Macedonia has actively engaged in the implementation of the new Growth Plan for the 
Western Balkans across its four pillars: (i) gradual integration with the EU single market, (ii) 
regional economic integration, (iii) fundamental reforms and (iv) increased financial support. 
Its Reform Agenda covers reform milestones in the areas of: (i) governance, public 
administration reform and public financial management; (ii) green and digital transition; (iii) 
human capital; (iv) private sector development and business environment; and (v) 
fundamental rights and the rule of law.  
The Commission’s 2024 rule of law report2 covered North Macedonia for the first time.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1  is presented in a renewed format and structure. Main findings of the report, together with the 
recommendations (previously grey assessment boxes) are brought together at the beginning of the report. 
Furthermore, under the fundamentals cluster, for better readability and comparability across all reports, certain 
data is provided (also) in the form of graphs. 
2 COM(2024)800 final 
 
4 
 
1.2. MAIN FINDINGS OF THE REPORT3 
2. CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
2.1.1 Democracy 
The conduct of the elections was mostly satisfactory. The parliamentary and presidential 
elections were competitive. Fundamental freedoms were respected. The election legislation 
provides a suitable framework for holding democratic elections. However, limited progress 
was made on addressing the outstanding recommendations of the OSCE’s Office for 
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) and the Venice Commission. North 
Macedonia should implement the recommendations rapidly and well before the next 
elections. 
The Parliament was found to exercise its powers in a mostly satisfactory way. However, 
political polarisation in Parliament persisted, delaying the adoption of important reforms and 
several long-overdue appointments. In November 2023, new rules of procedure were 
adopted based on a high degree of consensus, completing the commitments under the 
‘Jean Monnet Dialogue’. The new Parliament, constituted in May, was  able to find a broad 
consensus on the implementation of the new rules of procedure, on the need for a 
constructive and inclusive political debate and should accelerate its work on the 
continuation of reforms necessary for the EU integration process. Parliament should plan 
and adopt its agenda carefully and limit the use of fast-track legislative procedures or 
inappropriate use of the ‘EU flag’ procedure, which has been the practice up to now. Cross-
party collaboration is essential to accelerate the implementation of EU-related reforms, in 
the interest of citizens. Despite attempts, thus far, no progress was made on adopting the 
constitutional changes, with a view to including in the Constitution citizens who live within 
the borders of the State and who are part of other peoples, such as Bulgarians, as referred to 
in the Council Conclusions of 18 July 2022, which the country committed to launch and 
achieve. 
The institutions in charge of the integration process are in place. The new government 
established a Ministry of European Affairs, replacing the Secretariat for European Affairs. 
Following the successful completion of the screening process, North Macedonia needs to 
continue strengthening its EU negotiating structures and achieve sound coordination across 
line ministries and institutions, while further developing EU-acquis-related expertise across 
the public administration. 
Permanent and decisive steps are needed to accelerate the implementation of EU reforms 
and move forward in the EU accession negotiation process. Cross-party collaboration 
remains vital in this regard. A reform of local self-government is urgently needed and the 
dialogue between different levels of government should be relaunched. Inter-ethnic relations 
remained stable, and the Ohrid Framework Agreement continued to be implemented. 
Civil society organisations (CSOs) in North Macedonia operate in an overall enabling 
environment. However, the government should increase its efforts to mainstream civil 
 
3This report covers the period from 15 June 2023 to 1 September 2024. It is based on input from a variety of 
sources, including contributions from the government of North Macedonia, EU Member States, European 
Parliament reports and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also 
includes the results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the 
area of rule of law. 
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of 
preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made 
during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, 
good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been used. 
 
5 
 
society engagement in priority areas and in consultation activities. Existing legal and 
financial frameworks still need to be amended and implemented, particularly to provide 
consistent mechanisms for providing transparent public funding to CSOs. Urgent efforts are 
needed to resume the activities of the Council for Cooperation between the Government and 
Civil Society. 
Public administration reform 
North Macedonia remains moderately prepared in the area of public administration reform. 
Limited progress was made during the reporting period, notably the adoption of 
amendments to the Law on state organisation, which brought about improvements by 
clarifying lines of accountability, introducing impact assessments for the creation of new 
state bodies and decreasing the number of primary budget users. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not fully implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt and start implementing the revised Law on administrative servants, the revised 
Law on public service employees and the legal provisions on top management service; 
→ finalise the revision and start implementing the Law on state organisation and other 
related laws in line with the recommendations on the new organisation of state 
administrative bodies; 
→ ensure full implementation of the Law on general administrative procedures by 
completing the digitalisation of institutions’ registers and data exchange and simplifying 
electronic procedures. 
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights  
North Macedonia is between having some and a moderate level of preparation in applying 
the EU acquis and European standards in this area. Overall, there was limited progress on 
strengthening judicial independence and improving the legal framework for protecting 
fundamental rights. 
Functioning of the judiciary 
The judicial system of North Macedonia is between having some and a moderate level of 
preparation and made limited progress. The country adopted a new Strategy for Judicial 
Reform (2024-2028) and a roadmap on chapter 23 and has started to implement the 
recommendations of the 2023 peer review mission on the Judicial Council. The new 
government's announcements of plans to 'dissolve' the Judicial and Prosecution Councils 
are a matter of serious concern, as such actions would undermine the independence of the 
judiciary. The rising deficit in human resources in the judiciary raises concerns for impacting 
the quality and efficiency of justice. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and are 
therefore largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt a new Law on civil procedure, in line with European standards and start 
implementing the new strategy on judicial reform; 
→ strengthen the Judicial Council by revising the legislative framework and its overall 
functioning to enhance its transparency and independence, in line with the 
recommendations of the 2023 peer review mission, and step up the implementation of 
the human resources strategies for the judiciary and the prosecution; 
→ ensure that the automated court case management information system (ACCMIS) is 
fully functional and compatible with level of complexity of court cases and the method 
 
6 
 
for assessing judges and presidents of courts. 
Fight against corruption 
North Macedonia is between having some level of preparation and a moderate level of 
preparation and made no progress in the prevention and fight against corruption. Corruption 
remains prevalent in many areas and is an issue of serious concern. The current government 
has stated that the fight against corruption is a priority.  
The institutional framework for the fight against corruption is in place and is satisfactory in 
terms of preventive measures. However, improvement is needed on law enforcement. The 
newly composed State Commission for the Prevention of Corruption (SCPC) started its 
mandate on 8 February 2024. It is critical that it acts with the highest level of 
professionalism, integrity, and independence. It needs to continue to provide proactively 
policy guidance to prevent corruption, and to work in an inclusive and transparent manner. 
Its recommendations need to be effectively followed up. To enhance the performance of the 
SCPC, the Public Prosecutor’s Office, investigative centres and law enforcement units 
should all receive additional human resources and financial support. Strategic documents 
have been adopted and the legal framework for the fight against corruption is in place but 
needs to be improved, both in terms of preventive measures and law enforcement. 
The amendments to the Criminal Code of September 2023 weakened the legal framework, 
negatively affecting the prosecution of corruption, especially in high-level cases. Many 
ongoing cases were terminated either because the statute of limitations had expired or 
because specific offences, such as the abuse of office in public procurement, no longer 
exist. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not fully addressed and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt a new Criminal Code in line with the EU acquis and international standards. 
Improve its track record in high-level corruption cases – with timely, professional, and 
transparent proactive investigations, prosecutions, final convictions, and recovery, 
including confiscation of criminal assets, value-based confiscation, extended 
confiscation and third-party confiscation; 
→ improve the implementation of the national strategy for the prevention of corruption and 
conflict of interests and also the GRECO’s recommendations, in particular on the system 
of sanctions for the violation of conflicts of interest, integrity and anti-corruption rules; 
→ allocate sufficient human and financial resources, including financial experts, to the 
Office of the Basic Public Prosecutor for Organised Crime and Corruption to ensure 
effective accountability in high-level corruption cases; and to the State Commission for 
the Prevention of Corruption to improve the verification of assets declarations and the 
oversight of election campaign financing. 
Fundamental rights 
The legal framework on the protection of fundamental rights is partially aligned with the EU 
acquis and European standards. The country continues to meet its general obligations on 
fundamental rights, but legislation should be implemented in a systematic manner. In 
November 2023, the Parliament appointed the Macedonian Association of Young Lawyers 
and the Helsinki Committee for Human Rights (HCHR) to serve as the civil control 
mechanism within the Ombudsman’s office. The Parliament elected new anti-discrimination 
commissioners and filled vacant positions. No progress has been made on the protection of 
personal data. The overall situation in prisons remains dire although infrastructure was 
renovated and improved in several prison facilities. 
 
7 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were addressed only partially and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, the country should in particular: 
→ address the dire conditions in prisons and continue the efforts to promote alternatives to 
incarceration and implement relevant recommendations on detention conditions, made 
by national and international institutions, notably by the European Committee for the 
Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT); 
→ allocate the necessary resources to the Ombudsman's Office and to the Commission for 
the Prevention and Protection against Discrimination to enable them to fulfil their 
mandate; 
→ provide adequate support to vulnerable categories of children, especially children victims 
of violence, Roma4 children and children with disabilities. 
Freedom of expression 
North Macedonia is between having some level of preparation and a moderate level of 
preparation on freedom of expression and has made limited progress in this area. The Law 
on audio and audio-visual media services was amended in July 2023 to harmonise it with 
the Media Directive. It was amended again in February 2024 to reintroduce State advertising 
in commercial media, which was later criticised by the media regulator and media 
organisations. The Laws on media and the Electoral Code were also amended. However, 
these amendments were not comprehensive and multiple long-standing issues therefore 
remain unaddressed. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, the country should in particular: 
→ continue to revise the legal framework governing the media to align it with the EU acquis 
and European standards, notably by introducing rules on full transparency in media 
ownership and advertising, competition and State aid, and intellectual property rights, in 
accord with the EU single market; 
→ implement the strategy to reform the Public Broadcaster and appoint the Public Service 
Broadcaster’s Programme Council and the Media Regulator’s Council; 
→ continue to promptly address all threats and acts of violence against journalists and 
ensure perpetrators are brought to justice. 
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security 
North Macedonia is moderately prepared to implement the EU acquis. Some progress was 
made in the area of asset recovery and confiscation by further aligning the legislation with 
the EU acquis. Limited progress was made on migration and asylum where there was no 
further alignment with EU acquis. The new Frontex agreement is implemented in a 
satisfactory manner. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially met and remain 
mostly valid. Therefore, in the coming year the country should in particular: 
→ continue to proactively reform the structures responsible for fighting organised and 
financial crimes and money laundering with a focus on increasing operational capacity 
and cooperation and confiscating property when warranted; 
 
4In line with the terminology of European institutions the umbrella term ‘Roma’ is used here to refer to a number 
of different groups, without denying the specificities of these groups. 
 
8 
 
→ ensure effective implementation and monitoring of the national strategies for countering 
terrorism (2023-2027), countering violent extremism (2023-2027) and of the joint action 
plan on counterterrorism; 
→ systematically register migrants and improve protection-sensitive profiling and adopt a 
more systematic approach to fighting migrant smuggling. 
Fight against organised crime 
North Macedonia has between some level of preparation and a moderate level of 
preparation in the fight against organised crime. Some progress was made in the area of 
confiscation by aligning further the legislation on the Asset Recovery Office and 
management of confiscated property with the EU legal framework. Additional progress was 
made in setting up a Commission for the compensation of victims of trafficking in human 
beings.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially met and remain 
valid. Therefore, in the coming year the country should in particular: 
→ improve its track record on investigations, prosecutions and convictions in organised 
crime, financial crimes and money laundering cases, with a focus on asset recovery and 
confiscation of proceeds of crimes; 
→ strengthen the human and financial capacity of the law enforcement agencies 
investigating organised and serious crimes, financial crimes and money laundering, and 
of the Asset Recovery Office (ARO) and the Agency for Management of Confiscated 
Property; 
→ align its legislation on money laundering, asset recovery, weapons, narcotic drugs and 
psychotropic substances with the EU acquis. 
Economic criteria 
The existence of a functioning market economy 
North Macedonia has made some progress and is at a good level of preparation in 
developing a functioning market economy. Capital expenditure was raised significantly and 
fiscal governance reforms advanced. The current account balance improved markedly on 
account of falling import prices for energy and food. The central bank has kept the key 
interest rate unchanged since September 2023, as inflation has continued to subside. The 
banking sector remained resilient, and financial stability was bolstered by new 
macroprudential measures. The post-COVID recovery remained weak in 2023 and the fiscal 
deficit and public debt level increased. The labour market continues to face structural 
problems, including low participation rates, substantial emigration and a large gender gap. 
The business environment is still impeded by a large informal economy. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt the implementing legislation for the organic budget law and comply with the fiscal 
rules that will apply from 2025, including by adopting further revenue-enhancing 
measures; 
→ accelerate the implementation of the public investment management action plan and 
improve the legal framework for public-private partnerships and concessions;  
→ implement the new 2023-2025 strategy for formalising the informal economy. 
 
 
9 
 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union 
North Macedonia has made some progress and is moderately prepared to cope with 
competitive pressure and market forces within the EU. It has made some progress in 
increasing the share of energy production from renewable energy sources, and has 
modernised the legal framework for improving energy efficiency. Integration with the EU in 
trade and investment, as well as overall trade openness, remained high in 2023. The 
digitalisation of the economy is advancing, but domestic businesses suffer from low digital 
skills. The government adopted legislation to modernise the education system, but major 
skills shortages as well as gaps in transport and energy infrastructure persist. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not fully implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular:  
→ increase financial and human resources to speed up the VET system reforms; 
→ implement the action plan for the smart specialisation strategy;  
→ increase the use of renewable energy sources, including by adopting a new Law on 
renewable energy sources and the Law on biofuels;  
→ implement policies to reduce emissions, including by adopting the Law on climate 
action. 
Chapter 5: Public procurement 
North Macedonia is moderately prepared in the area of public procurement. Limited 
progress was made since the last assessment. The capacities of key institutions, 
contracting authorities and economic operators must be increased further through 
continuous training. Competition in public procurement and use of most economically 
advantageous tender (MEAT) criteria should increase. National authorities should 
implement more effective anti-corruption measures in the procurement cycle. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt the public-private partnership (PPP) law and the Law on concessions, to further 
align the legal framework in these areas with the EU acquis; 
→ increase the use of MEAT criteria for the award of contracts and improve the monitoring 
of public procurement procedures through reporting on and the follow-up of 
irregularities, cases of conflict of interest and fraudulent practices; 
→ improve coordination among key stakeholders to fight corruption and strengthen their 
capacities to implement the principles of transparency, free competition, equal treatment 
and non-discrimination. 
Chapter 18: Statistics 
The country is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of statistics. 
Some progress was made, mainly in area of statistical infrastructure, business and trade 
and financial accounts statistics. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not fully implemented and  remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ conduct the agriculture census; 
→ ensure adequate staffing and sufficient financial resources for the State Statistical 
 
10 
 
Office; 
→ continue to improve macroeconomic statistics, notably by establishing transparency, 
enhancing consistency, timeliness and coverage of the excessive deficit procedure and 
government finance statistics and by further aligning financial accounts and quarterly 
national accounts with the European System of Accounts 2010 (ESA 2010). 
Chapter 32: Financial control 
The country is moderately prepared in the area of financial control and has made limited 
progress. Public internal financial controls (PIFC) and managerial accountability reforms are 
delayed due to substantial delays in the adoption of the PIFC law, which is still in 
Parliamentary procedure after more than 3 years. The institutional capacity of the financial 
inspection needs to be strengthened. The independence of the State Audit Office (SAO) is 
still not guaranteed by the Constitution and the State audit law is pending government 
adoption. The efficiency of Parliamentary oversight of public funds and follow-up of audit 
recommendations needs to improve. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt and start implementing the new PIFC law in order to strengthen the institutional 
capacity of internal audit units, managerial accountability and sound financial 
management; 
→ adopt the State audit law to strengthen SAO’s independence, enhance cooperation 
between the SAO and the Parliament, improve Parliamentary scrutiny over individual 
audit reports, and the follow-up to SAO’s recommendations; 
→ ensure the efficient functioning of the Anti-Fraud Coordination Service Network (AFCOS) 
and improve the prevention, management and reporting of irregularities that affect EU 
funds. 
 
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET 
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods 
North Macedonia is moderately prepared on the free movement of goods. While the national 
legislation allows goods to enter EU market, full alignment with the latest EU acquis is yet to 
be achieved. No progress was made in the reporting period.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not fully implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt the Law on market surveillance and the implementing legislation necessary to 
complete the alignment with the EU General Products Safety Directive; 
→ Adopt a new strategy for the free movement of goods, which should include foreseeing a 
significantly increase in human resources for legal and policy development and 
implementation; 
→ adopt a new action plan to eliminate the non-tariff barriers to trade and ensure 
compliance with Articles 34-36 of the Treaty on Functioning of the European Union.  
Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers 
North Macedonia is at an early stage of preparation on freedom of movement for workers, 
 
11 
 
and no progress was made in this area. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ strengthen the capacity of the Employment Service Agency, by continuing to organise 
training activities, and further align legislation and the exchange of good practices, in line 
with EURES and ELA regulations; 
→ continue to adapt the legal framework to the EU acquis on access to the labour market, 
particularly to rules on non-discrimination on grounds of nationality against EU workers 
in all sectors; 
→ continue to negotiate and conclude bilateral agreements on social security coordination 
and healthcare insurance with EU Member States and put in place administrative 
measures to prepare for accession. 
Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services 
On the right of establishment and the freedom to provide services, North Macedonia is 
moderately prepared. It made limited progress in continuing to align the sectoral legislation 
with the Services Directive. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ continue the implementation of the 2024-2026 action plan to address non-compliance of 
listed sectoral laws with the Law on services; 
→ finalise alignment with the EU acquis on postal services and ensure sufficient capacity to 
monitor and enforce the new postal market rules; 
→ align with the EU acquis on mutual recognition of professional qualifications, in particular 
the Directive on recognition of professional qualifications and Directive on a 
proportionality test before adoption of the new regulation of professions. 
Chapter 4: Free movement of capital 
North Macedonia is moderately prepared in the area of free movement of capital. Limited 
progress was made in the area of payment systems and the fight against money laundering 
and terrorist financing (AML/CTF). 
The Commission's recommendations from last year were not fully implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt and implement the roadmap setting out actions and timelines for applying EU 
rules on the free movement of capital, including the acquisition of agricultural land; 
→ continue to implement the Law on payment systems and services to help roll out a 
broader set of high-quality and secure payment services, including by accelerating the 
set-up of the unified register of bank accounts; 
→ continue to implement the new legislation on the prevention of money laundering and 
financing of terrorism in line with the EU acquis, including by following up on the 
country’s MONEYVAL assessment of 2023. 
Chapter 6: Company law 
The country has a good level of preparation in the area of company law. However, no 
 
12 
 
progress was made during the reporting period. The country needs to step up efforts to 
align its legislation with the EU acquis in this area. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ 
align national legislation with the acquis on encouraging long-term shareholder 
engagement,  
→ 
align national legislation with directives on cross-border conversions, mergers and 
divisions and on the use of digital tools and processes in company law; 
→ 
adopt legislation on accounting and on audit, aligned with the latest EU acquis in these 
areas, including to strengthen the role and capacity of the Council for Advancement 
and Oversight of Audit. 
Chapter 7: Intellectual property law 
North Macedonia remains moderately prepared in the area of intellectual property law. No 
progress was made. Further efforts are needed to align the legislation with the EU acquis in 
this area. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ 
further improve the legal framework on copyright and related rights, notably by aligning 
with the Directive on collective rights management, the Directive on orphan works, as 
well as with the Directives on online transmissions of broadcasting organisations and 
retransmissions of television and radio programmes (SatCab II) and on Digital Single 
Market (DSM); 
→ 
further improve the legal framework on industrial property rights, by aligning with the 
Directive on the enforcement of intellectual property rights and with the Directive on 
trade secrets; 
→ 
implement the 2021-2026 intellectual property strategy and make operational the 
online information platform for law enforcement institutions to exchange data on 
intellectual property rights; 
→ 
leverage collaboration with the European Union Intellectual Property Office especially in 
the area of technical and operation support of acquis alignment and enforcement. 
Chapter 8: Competition policy 
The country is moderately prepared in the area of competition. No progress was made. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ 
further align the legislative framework, in particular the implementing legislation in the 
area of State aid and antitrust, with the EU acquis; 
→ 
ensure full transparency of State aid granted by the authorities; 
→ 
strengthen the administrative and financial capacity of the national competition 
authority. 
Chapter 9: Financial services 
The country is moderately prepared in the area of financial services. There was some 
 
13 
 
progress. A bank recovery and resolution law was enacted which appointed a bank 
resolution authority. Two key pieces of legislation, the Law on financial instruments and the 
Law on prospectus and transparency of securities’ issuers were also adopted, completing 
alignment with the Settlement Finality Directive. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not fully implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→  continue to align the banking regulation with the revised versions of the Capital 
Requirements Regulation, the Capital Requirements Directive (CRR/CRD) and the Bank 
Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD); 
→ align with the Solvency II Directive, notably pillar 1 and pillar 3 of that Directive; 
→ step up implementation of the legislation regulating capital markets, notably by adopting 
implementing legislation for the Law on financial instruments and the Law on 
prospectuses and transparency of security issuers as well as the law on alternative 
investment funds, and continue efforts to align with the financial market infrastructures 
acquis. 
Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection 
In the area of consumer and health protection North Macedonia remains moderately 
prepared. Limited progress was made on cancer screening. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt the 2025-2028 consumer protection strategy, set up a web platform to inform the 
public on consumer issues, and strengthen market surveillance capacity; 
→ ensure effective tobacco control by implementing the relevant EU acquis and ratify the 
Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products, and complete alignment with the 
EU acquis on medicines for human use and medicines for veterinary use; 
→ increase funding and human resources in the area of health, particularly for cancer 
detection and the treatment of rare diseases, based on data from the respective 
registers. 
 
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH 
Chapter 10: Digital transformation and media 
The country is moderately prepared in the area of digital transformation and media. Limited 
progress was made, notably a slight increase in electronic services available to citizens and 
businesses, and the adoption of rulebooks aimed at reducing the cost of deploying high-
speed networks. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ finalise and adopt the long-term information and communication technology (ICT) 
strategy; finalise and adopt the national cybersecurity strategy; align national legislation 
with the European Electronic Communications Code, the EU Broadband Cost Reduction 
Directive; the EU Directive on security of network and information systems (NIS 2 
Directive) and the 5G cybersecurity toolbox; 
→ strengthen the independence and capacity of the media regulator, the Public Service 
 
14 
 
Broadcaster and the regulator on electronic communication; 
→ improve the functioning of the 112 emergency number by ensuring adequate human 
resources and improve communication among the emergency services. 
Chapter 16: Taxation 
North Macedonia remains moderately prepared in the area of taxation. Limited progress 
was made, specifically by reducing the administrative burden for taxpayers and setting up a 
reform management office to support the reform agenda of the Public Revenue Office 
(PRO). 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not fully implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ develop a new integrated IT tax system for the PRO, improve its compliance risk 
management and step up the strategic reform process of the PRO; 
→ start preparations for putting in place a mechanism for the effective implementation of 
the automatic exchange of tax information with EU Member States in line with the OECD 
Global Standard. 
→ start the preparations towards achieving interconnection and interoperability with the EU 
taxation IT systems. 
Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy 
The country is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of 
economic and monetary policy and some progress was made. A prudent monetary policy 
helped contain inflation. Last year’s recommendations were partly implemented by 
appointing Members of the Fiscal Council and steps were taken to ensure the 
independence of the central bank, notably by revising the legal framework setting out 
employment conditions for its personnel. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ ensure the organic budget law (OBL) is fully implemented by 2025, by adopting the 
necessary implementing legislation, in particular on budget classification and on the 
statement on fiscal policy; and by updating the manual on macro-fiscal projections; 
→  strengthen the central bank's independence; adopt the pending laws on administrative 
servants and the Law on public sector employees and take the measures necessary for 
the enforcement and operationalisation of the macroprudential and resolution 
frameworks by the central bank. 
Chapter 19: Social policy and employment 
The country remains moderately prepared in the area of social policy and employment. 
Some progress was made by further reducing the unemployment rate and increasing social 
assistance benefits. The countrywide implementation of the Youth Guarantee Scheme 
continued. The poverty rate decreased but remains significantly high. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ continue to implement labour market activation strategies for young people, the long-
term unemployed and low-skilled individuals, as well as for women, persons with 
disabilities, and Roma, and ensure that these measures are properly evaluated; 
 
15 
 
→ increase the capacity of the State Labour Inspectorate to tackle issues pertaining to 
occupational safety and health, set up a system to monitor work-related injuries and 
deaths, and strengthen bipartite social dialogue between employers and workers; 
→ set up a monitoring and evaluation framework for social services and advance the social 
protection reform, creating stronger connections to employment activation initiatives 
and strengthen the social dialogue. 
Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy 
The country has between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of 
enterprise and industrial policy. Some progress was made. The plan to consolidate the 
institutional structures and mandates of public bodies and the export promotion strategy 
were adopted, and a set of measures to implement the strategy on the formalisation of the 
informal economy were introduced.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to some extent. In 
the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ implement the plan for the consolidation of the institutional structure and the mandates 
of public bodies; 
→ adopt the strategy for the development of small and medium-sized companies (SMEs), 
and boost export readiness and the integration of companies in supply chains by 
stepping up efforts to implement the export promotion strategy; 
→  improve the process of consulting enterprises during the preparation of measures and 
of informing them with sufficient lead time about implementation conditions. 
Chapter 25: Science and research 
The country has a good level of preparation in the area of science and research. Some 
progress was made, notably by adopting the smart specialisation strategy for 2024-2027, 
setting up the European Institute of Innovation and Technology regional innovation scheme 
(EIT RIS), and continuing to participate in Horizon Europe. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ increase the efficiency of State resources for science and research in line with the new 
European Research Area priorities; 
→ promote and increase participation in Horizon Europe; 
→ step up the design and implementation of measures included in the smart specialisation 
strategy. 
Chapter 26: Education and culture 
North Macedonia is moderately prepared in the area of education and culture. Limited 
progress was made. Work on the 2018-2025 education strategy and on developing a proper 
monitoring system continued to be slow. The adoption of key legislation such as the Law on 
secondary education, the Law on adult education and the Law on vocational education and 
training (VET) was delayed. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt the Laws on secondary education, on adult education and on VET, as well as the 
 
16 
 
related implementing legislation, and continue to set up and operationalise the regional 
VET centres; 
→ improve access to quality education for all, in particular for children with disabilities and 
children from Roma communities; further develop teachers’ skills and invest in their 
continuous professional development; 
→ optimise the school network; adopt and apply the new formulas for financing primary 
education; complete and apply similar formulas for secondary, VET and higher 
education. 
Chapter 29: Customs union 
North Macedonia has a good level of preparation in this area. Limited progress was made 
on the consolidation and upgrade of IT systems. The customs administration implements a 
fully paperless environment for processing customs declarations and excise documents. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ upgrade its national component of the New Computerised Transit System (NCTS) to 
Phase 5; 
→ ensure continued alignment of the customs legislation with the EU acquis and continue 
the consolidation and application of its national customs IT systems in line with the 
Commission’s Union Customs Code (UCC) Work Programme and multiannual strategic 
plan (MASP) modules, and ensure their upgrade; 
→ ratify the Protocol on Elimination of Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products. 
 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY 
Chapter 14: Transport policy 
The country is moderately prepared in the area of transport. Some progress was made in the 
reporting period, notably by adopting the new Law on aviation. The sector inspection bodies 
still lack administrative and operational capacity to improve. 
The Commission's recommendations from last year were not fully implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ ensure qualified operational and administrative capacity of the inspection bodies and 
develop their enforcement capacity to reduce accidents and fatalities in road and rail 
transport; 
→ implement the connectivity reform measures for road and rail and finalise pending 
border-crossing agreements/protocols to facilitate the flow of traffic and goods; 
→ adopt and implement legislation on multimodal and intelligent transport systems (ITS) 
for road and rail and on electronic freight transport information . 
Chapter 15: Energy  
North Macedonia is moderately prepared in the area of energy. Some progress was made 
on renewable energy, with investments in solar power plants and in regional gas 
interconnectors. The country needs to accelerate its transition towards green energy and 
reduce its dependence on coal and gas. 
 
17 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not fully implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ implement the Just Transition roadmap, in particular to make the governance 
mechanisms planned in the roadmap fully operational; 
→ ensure sufficient human resources and institutional capacities for the newly established 
Ministry in charge of Energy; 
→ adopt and start implementing the necessary legislation on the energy market, renewable 
energy and energy efficiency, in line with the relevant EU directives. 
Chapter 21: Trans-European networks 
North Macedonia has a good level of preparation in the area of trans-European networks. 
Limited progress was made during the reporting period.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ strengthen the operational and technical capacity of all management and stakeholder 
institutions dealing with the development of both the Trans-European Transport (TEN-T) 
and Trans-European Energy (TEN-E) networks, harmonise the legal framework and 
increase compliance with the Trans-European Network Regulation; 
→ mobilise sufficient resources to implement  the goals and deadlines set out in the 
Transport Community’s five-year rolling work plan for the development of the TEN-T 
extension  ; 
→ make the Railway Border-Crossing Protocol signed with Kosovo operational, finalise the 
mutual agreement for border crossings procedures with Greece, and accelerate progress 
on the construction and completion of the rail connection along Corridor VIII with 
Bulgaria. 
Chapter 27: Environment and climate change 
North Macedonia has some level of preparation in this area. Limited progress was made 
during the reporting period, notably in the area of waste management, by adopting a law on 
expanding the producer’ s responsibility. Further efforts on implementation and enforcement 
are still needed in all sectors , in particular, in climate change where no progress was made. 
The country is encouraged to enhance its civil protection operational capacity and 
coordination with the Union Civil Protection Mechanism.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not fully addressed and remain 
valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should, in particular: 
→ strengthen its administrative and inspection capacities for implementation and 
enforcement of the environmental acquis significantly, implement structural reforms in 
all sectors and ensure that there is there an institutional structure in place to deliver 
coordinated, strategic planning for environmental investments;  
→ make the regional waste management system in the Eastern and Northeastern regions 
operational;  
→ adopt the Law on climate change, consistent with the EU 2030 framework, implement 
the National Energy and Climate Plan (NECP)  and  the Energy Community's 
Decarbonisation Roadmap, focusing on the MRVA package to introduce carbon pricing 
and align with the EU ETS and  make the climate change unit within the Ministry of 
 
18 
 
Environment and Physical Planning operational. 
 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION 
Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development 
North Macedonia remains moderately prepared in the area of agriculture and rural 
development. Good progress was made during the reporting period, notably by adopting the 
Law on advisory services and by making progress on IPARD II and IPARD III implementation. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year 's report were not fully implemented 
and therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt legislation to further align with the EU acquis in the areas of agriculture support 
payments, common market organisation, quality policy and organic farming; 
→ ensure the inter-operability of various elements from IACS together with the verification 
of data accuracy and transfer of the farm register and the land parcel identification 
system (LPIS) to the paying agency; 
→ improve the administrative capacity in the instrument for pre-accession assistance for 
rural development (IPARD) operating structures to ensure robust implementation of the 
IPARD III programme. 
Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy 
North Macedonia has a good level of preparation in the areas of food safety, and veterinary 
and phytosanitary policy. Some progress was made over the reporting period, particularly in 
fighting animal diseases, plant health control and implementing pest eradication measures 
based on phytosanitary monitoring programmes results. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt the draft law on official controls and the new Law on animal health and continue 
to approximate national rules with EU animal welfare legislation; 
→ strengthen capacity for data analysis and improve structures for implementation of the 
General Food Law Regulation in the Food and Veterinary Agency; 
→ implement measures on the sustainable use of pesticides. 
Chapter 13: Fisheries and aquaculture 
North Macedonia is moderately prepared in the area of fisheries and aquaculture. Good 
progress was made during the reporting period, with the adoption of the new Law for 
aquaculture and fisheries in line with the EU acquis on marketing standards, structural 
measures and State aid, but also setting the basic provisions in line with the EU Eel 
Regulation.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year not fully implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt the implementing legislation on marketing standards, consumer information, 
traceability, and producer’s organisations as well as a national strategic plan on 
aquaculture; 
→ improve the data collection system and reporting, such as by setting up a data 
 
19 
 
framework for collecting data on fisheries and aquaculture, and including information on 
catches of European eel both in recreational and in commercial fishing as well as an 
analysis of its consequences;  
→ improve the controls of fish stock management and of illegal, unreported and 
unregulated (IUU) fishing by introducing a catch certification system. 
Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments 
North Macedonia is moderately prepared in the area of regional policy and coordination of 
structural instruments. Limited progress was made over the reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ upgrade its institutional, administrative and technical capacity to manage EU funds by 
adopting an overall staff retention policy, strengthening capacities, improving the 
implementation of EU and audit recommendations, and stepping up interinstitutional 
cooperation; 
→ strengthen public investment by adopting the Decree on public investment management 
and the Law on public-private partnerships; 
→ accelerate the decentralisation process by putting in place a credible financing 
framework for municipalities and strengthening policy dialogue on regional 
development. 
Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions 
Preparations under this chapter are at an early stage. Limited progress was made over the 
reporting period. National accounts and gross national income calculations need to be 
further aligned with the EU acquis. All Customs declarations and excise documents are 
electronically processed, but the institutional set-up necessary for the efficient functioning 
of the own resources system is yet to be established. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not fully implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ improve the legal basis and methodological tools for the own resources system; 
→ continue aligning data on national accounts with ESA 2010 and improving the 
comprehensiveness of data transmission to Eurostat; 
→ strengthen the administrative capacities of and coordination mechanisms for key 
stakeholders in the system. 
 
CLUSTER 6: EXTERNAL RELATIONS 
Chapter 30: External relations 
The country has a good level of preparation in the area of external relations and made 
limited progress during the reporting period, in particular in implementing the CEFTA 
protocols and in efforts to develop its export control system. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ put in place a legal framework on international cooperation and development policy, and 
 
20 
 
humanitarian aid for non-EU countries, in line with EU policies and principles; 
→ continue to implement commitments under the CRM Action Plan for 2021-2024 and 
implement actions under the new action plan for 2025-2028, further implement CEFTA 
Protocol 6 on trade in services, and take the necessary steps to implement CEFTA 
Protocol 7 on dispute settlement. 
Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy 
North Macedonia has a good level of preparation in the area of common foreign, security 
and defence policy. Good progress  was made as the country maintained its track record of 
full alignment with relevant High Representative statements on behalf of the EU and relevant 
Council Decisions, including EU restrictive measures related to Russia’s war of aggression 
against Ukraine. North Macedonia continued to participate in EU crisis management 
missions and operations. The country  initiated negotiations on a Security and Defence 
Partnership with the EU in spring 2024. 
The recommendations from last year were to a great extent implemented and remain 
partially valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ maintain full alignment with the EU common foreign and security policy; 
→ continue to strengthen its capacity to implement and enforce the sanctions in place; 
→ make additional efforts to align legislation in the area of small arms and light weapons. 
 
1.3. 
STATE OF PLAY OF THE ACCESSION NEGOTIATIONS 
Following the first Intergovernmental Conference on accession negotiations with North 
Macedonia, the Commission immediately launched the analytical examination of the EU 
acquis – the ‘screening’ process. After tabling the screening report on cluster 1 in July 2023, 
in the autumn of 2023 the Council outlined to North Macedonia the terms for opening 
accession negotiations on the first cluster (fundamentals) once the constitutional 
amendments are adopted. In response, the government adopted the roadmaps on the rule of 
law and on public administration reform. The adoption of the action plan on the protection of 
minorities is still pending. The screening reports on cluster – 2 internal market was 
presented to the Council in May 2024, followed by the screening reports on cluster 6 – 
external relations and cluster 3 – competitiveness and inclusive growth in October 2024.