3 
 
1.  
INTRODUCTION  
1.1.  
CONTEXT   
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) between the Republic of North 
Macedonia and the European Union entered into force in April 2004 and continues to be 
implemented. Since 2009, the Commission has continuously recommended to the Council to 
open accession negotiations with North Macedonia, a candidate country since 2005. Based on 
the progress achieved and the conditions having been met, the European Council endorsed the 
Council’s decision to open accession negotiations with North Macedonia in March 20201. 
Overall, the country has continued to maintain a steady and determined pace in advancing EU 
reforms, focusing on the fundamentals. Pending bilateral issues between Bulgaria and North 
Macedonia need to be resolved as a matter of priority. The authorities in North Macedonia 
continued to demonstrate publicly their commitment to advance on their EU path. The delays 
in the official launch of accession negotiations are having a negative impact on the credibility 
of the EU. 
The COVID-19 pandemic continued throughout the reporting period. By early October 2021, 
North Macedonia had recorded in total around 193,000 cases and about 6,750 deaths related 
to the pandemic. Around 35% of the population were fully vaccinated in early October. 
The authorities have taken measures to protect public health and mitigate the socio-economic 
impact of the COVID-19 crisis. The EU has provided substantial support to North Macedonia 
since the pandemic began and mobilised a package of EUR 66 million of non-repayable 
financial aid for immediate needs, emergency medical equipment and socio-economic 
response to the pandemic. This was complemented by EUR 160 million in macro-financial 
assistance for North Macedonia. The EU, as Team Europe has also supported the country’s 
vaccination campaign by providing almost 350,000 doses by early October as either donations 
or re-sales covered by an EU grant. 
1.2.  
SUMMARY OF THE REPORT2 3 
On the political criteria, North Macedonia continued its efforts to strengthen democracy and 
the rule of law, including by activating existing checks and balances and through an outreach 
on key policy and legislative issues. The country has shown its commitment to deliver in the 
key areas of the fundamentals, including through the ‘Europe at Home’ agenda and the 
‘Action Plan 21’ on the fight against corruption. The first round of the local elections took 
place on 17 October. The Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the 
Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE/ODIHR) has deployed an 
Election Observation Mission. Limited progress was made in addressing the outstanding 
recommendations from OSCE/ODIHR and the Venice Commission over the reporting period. 
The comprehensive review of electoral legislation and the adoption of the relevant laws still 
need to be finalised in a timely and inclusive manner.  
                                                          
1 https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/43076/26-vc-euco-statement-en.pdf 
2 This report covers the period from June 2020 to June 2021. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from the government of North Macedonia, the EU Member States, European Parliament 
reports and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. This also includes the 
results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in rule of law. 
3 For the state of play the report uses the following assessment scales: early stage, some level of preparation, 
moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. For progress made during the reporting 
period, the following scale has been used: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, good 
progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, also interim steps have been used. 
 
 
4 
 
Opposition parties remained actively engaged in Parliament and on some occasions supported 
key EU related laws. Parliamentary work was nevertheless impeded by political polarisation, 
compounded by COVID-19, which on occasion affected its ordinary functions. Efforts are 
needed to strengthen the role of Parliament as a forum for constructive political dialogue, 
particularly on the EU reform agenda. Parliament continued to exercise its legislative 
functions. Great care should be taken in the use of fast track procedures, which need to be 
limited to ensure effective scrutiny and consultation of legislation. Parliament continued to 
exercise proper oversight of the executive. The proposals for internal reform of Parliament, 
agreed during the third round of the ‘Jean Monnet Dialogue’4 in early 2020, have yet to be put 
in place. The criminal responsibility for those who orchestrated or committed violence in the 
attack on Parliament on 27 April 2017 continued to be established, including through first 
instance verdicts. The government needs to keep up the reform momentum and focus on the 
implementation of the existing legal framework rather than launching sporadic new 
initiatives. Timely and substantial implementation of the reform agenda requires sustained 
support from society as a whole. Inter-ethnic relations remained stable and the Ohrid 
Framework Agreement continued to be implemented.  
Civil society organisations continued to be active and have an important role to play in the 
reform process. Further efforts are needed to ensure a more timely, meaningful and 
transparent consultation process with civil society. In the context of the challenges faced in 
recovering from the COVID-19 crisis, governmental and non-governmental actors are 
expected to build long-term partnerships and to strengthen existing cooperation.  
The reform of the intelligence sector, resulting in new structures being established and a legal 
framework being developed, has almost been completed. The country needs to strengthen the 
capacity for parliamentary oversight over the intelligence services. 
North Macedonia is moderately prepared in the reform of its public administration. Some 
progress was made in finalising the horizontal functional review of the state administration. It 
is important that the horizontal functional review is adopted by the government. 
Recommendations were made for the new organisation of state administrative bodies with 
improved lines of accountability. These need to feed into the relevant legislation, which 
should be adopted and implemented. North Macedonia is currently reviewing the legislative 
framework on human resources management through the revision of the Law on 
Administrative Servants and the Law on Public Service Employees, and is introducing a new 
Law on Top Management Service. The new framework should improve the management of 
human resources across the administration and will contribute to ensuring better respect for 
merit-based recruitments, promotions and dismissals, including at senior management level. 
The monitoring reports on implementation of the Public Administration Reform Strategy and 
the Public Financial Management Reform Programme were presented. The State Commission 
for the Prevention of Corruption (SCPC) continued to address cases of alleged nepotism, 
cronyism and political influence in the process of recruitment of public sector employees and 
in the process of appointment of members of supervisory and management boards. Its 
findings and recommendations need to be systematically followed-up by the concerned 
institutions. 
 
The judicial system of North Macedonia has some level of preparation/ is moderately 
prepared. Some progress was achieved regarding the implementation of the judicial reform 
                                                          
4 The objective of the ‘Jean Monnet Dialogue’, initiated by the European Parliament in 2018 with the Parliament 
of North Macedonia, aims at building confidence amongst political parties and strengthening democratic culture 
and practices in Parliament.  
 
5 
 
strategy, thereby further addressing the recommendations from the Venice Commission and 
the Senior Experts’ Group on systemic Rule of Law issues. Efforts are still needed to ensure 
systematic implementation of the updated action plan on the judicial reform strategy and the 
human resources strategies for the judiciary and prosecution. Judicial institutions continue 
applying the new rules for the appointment, promotion, discipline and dismissal of judges and 
prosecutors. Most of the implementing legislation of the revised Law on the Council of Public 
Prosecutors was adopted. It is important to continue implementing the legal framework and 
strategic plans related to the reform of the Judicial Council and the Council of Public 
Prosecutors.  A new draft Law on the Academy for Judges and Prosecutors should maintain 
the Academy as the sole entry point to the judiciary and prosecution and should secure a fair 
and transparent access to these professions 
North Macedonia has some level of preparation / is moderately prepared in the prevention 
and fight against corruption. Some progress has been made, as the country continued to 
consolidate its track record on investigating, prosecuting and trying several corruption cases, 
including at high level, and strengthened its institutional framework, especially the State 
Commission for Prevention of Corruption (SCPC) and the Prosecutor for Organised Crime 
and Corruption (OCCPO). In April 2021, Parliament adopted the 2021-2025 National 
Strategy for the Prevention of Corruption and Conflict of Interest and related Action Plan, 
consolidating the country’s commitment to prevent corruption and sanction corrupt behaviour. 
The cases initiated by the former Special Prosecutor’s Office (SPO) continued to move 
forward, thereby establishing accountability for the illegal wiretaps. A number of cases were 
subject to first instance rulings and new cases were opened on the basis of investigative 
material from the former Special Prosecutor’s Office. The State Commission for the 
Prevention of Corruption has been pro-active in preventing corruption and opened several 
cases, including against high-level officials. The State Commission was allocated new 
premises. Nonetheless, the efforts to improve its functioning should continue, especially by 
allocating extra funding for the recruitment of expert staff. 
The country has some level of preparation in the fight against organised crime. The 
legislative framework is broadly in line with European standards and efforts to implement 
strategies against organised crime must continue. Some progress was made at the operational 
level, but more needs to be done to improve the effectiveness of law enforcement in fighting 
certain forms of crime, such as money laundering and financial crimes. Coordination remains 
crucial for all stakeholders involved in combatting organised crime. 
Some progress has been made in the fight against terrorism and preventing/countering 
violent extremism in line with the objectives set out in the Joint Action Plan on counter-
terrorism for the Western Balkans and the bilateral implementing arrangement. A national 
plan for reintegration, resocialisation and rehabilitation of foreign fighters returnees and 
members of their families was adopted in June 2020, in order to implement the identified 
priorities for preventing violent extremism and radicalisation. 
The legal framework on the protection of fundamental rights is largely in line with European 
standards. The Law on the Prevention and Protection against Discrimination and the 
Commission for the Prevention and Protection against Discrimination are in place. The 
deinstitutionalisation process made real progress and almost all of the children concerned 
were resettled to community-based care. The Ministry of Labour and Social Policy is 
investing in community services, including supporting victims of gender-based violence. 
Important progress was achieved with the adoption of the Law on Prevention and Protection 
from Violence against Women and Domestic Violence, with cross-party support. An 
improvement is noted in terms of gender mainstreaming and women’s rights, although women 
are among the categories most severely affected by the pandemic. Recommendations of 
 
6 
 
European and international human rights bodies, particularly regarding the treatment of 
detained and convicted persons must be fully implemented without delay. It is also important 
for the country to enhance the implementation of the legislation on hate speech and of the 
national action plan for the implementation of the Istanbul Convention’s provisions. The 
civilian external oversight mechanism over the police is not fully functional, and the absence 
of genuinely independent investigators impedes efforts to address police impunity and 
effective prosecution. The country should continue to improve the situation in prisons and to 
further increase alternatives to detention. 
North Macedonia has achieved some level of preparation/ is moderately prepared in the area 
of freedom of expression. Overall, there was limited progress during the reporting period. 
The general context is favourable to media freedom and allows for critical media reporting 
although there have been increased tensions during the COVID-19 crisis. Self-regulation 
efforts need to be resumed and followed by concrete results for the advancement in 
professional standards of journalism. Greater transparency should be ensured regarding media 
advertising by state institutions and political parties. The authorities need to increase their 
efforts to reform the public service broadcaster, ensuring its independence and financial 
sustainability. The public service broadcaster adopted a five-year development strategy but 
the reform process is hampered by delays in appointing the members in its managing council 
and of the council of the Agency for Audio and Audio-visual Media Services. The COVID-19 
crisis had a strong economic impact on the media sector, especially on the regional and local 
actors. Media outlets were included in the relief package, but the labour rights of journalists 
still need to be addressed. 
On regional cooperation, the country maintained its good relations with other enlargement 
countries and maintained its engagement in regional initiatives. Existing bilateral agreements, 
including the Prespa Agreement between North Macedonia and Greece as well as the Treaty 
of Friendship, Good Neighbourliness and Cooperation with Bulgaria, need to be implemented 
in good faith by all parties. 
On the economic criteria, North Macedonia has made some progress and is at a good level of 
preparation in developing a functioning market economy. Severely hit by the pandemic, the 
economy slipped into a recession in 2020. A gradual recovery set in as of spring 2021. The 
government implemented a strong fiscal response to mitigate the crisis impact on households 
and firms. The fiscal deficit rose to 8.2 % of GDP in 2020 while the public debt level rose 
sharply to 60.2 % of GDP, as additional financing needs had to be covered. Capital 
expenditure was cut in a budget revision to create space for crisis-related transfer payments, 
yet it was still heavily under-executed. The authorities took some additional measures to 
improve fiscal transparency, although a fully operational state aid registry is yet to be 
developed. There has been little progress made in improving revenue mobilisation and 
collection, as well as public investment management, including through a stronger framework 
for public-private partnerships. The new organic budget law, which is expected to 
significantly improve fiscal governance, is yet to be adopted by Parliament, and its 
implementation is delayed. Bolstered by regulatory easing, the financial sector remained 
strong and lending to the private sector constant. The business environment continued to be 
impeded by the large size of the informal economy. 
North Macedonia has made some progress in addressing last year’s recommendations and is 
moderately prepared to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union. 
Integration with the EU in trade and investment remained entrenched also during the 
pandemic. The level and structure of trade and manufacturing output were affected by 
lockdowns and supply chain disruptions, domestically and in trade partner countries. The 
 
7 
 
structure of the industry is continuously improving. The deterioration in labour productivity 
and price competitiveness in 2020 reflects to a large degree the economic impact of the 
pandemic and the government’s job-retention measures. Vocational Educational Training 
(VET) curricula has improved. Still, skills shortages, reflecting shortcomings in education 
curricula, capital investment gaps, and limited integration of domestic firms in global supply 
chains are restricting potential growth. Digitisation of the economy is progressing.  
As regards its ability to assume the obligations of membership, North Macedonia is 
moderately prepared in most of the areas covered by Cluster 2 on internal market, namely 
the free movement of goods, services and capital, intellectual property and competition 
policy. Meanwhile, the country has a good level of preparation on company law, although it is 
still at an early stage on freedom of movement for workers. In the reporting period, North 
Macedonia made limited or no progress in all areas, except on free movement of capital, 
company law and intellectual property where it made some progress. Overall, more progress 
is needed in the coming year in the areas covered by this cluster as it is relevant for North 
Macedonia’s preparations to meet the requirements of the EU’s internal market and for the 
development of the Common Regional Market. 
Overall, North Macedonia is moderately prepared in most of the areas covered by Cluster 3 
on competitiveness and inclusive growth, including in information society and media, 
taxation, enterprise and industrial policy, education and culture, and economic and monetary 
policy. However, additional efforts are needed to bring these areas to a higher degree of 
preparedness. It has a good level of preparation in the areas of science and research and 
customs union. Some progress was made in most of these areas. More efforts are needed, 
particularly in areas where limited progress was made, such as information society and media, 
science and research as well as education and culture.  
On Cluster 4 on the Green Agenda and sustainable connectivity, North Macedonia has a 
good level of preparation in trans-European networks. It is moderately prepared on transport 
policy and energy and as some level of preparation on environment and climate change. North 
Macedonia is actively participating in meetings of the Transport Community and Energy 
Community. It has a high level of compliance with the Energy Community Treaty, notably on 
electricity. As all Western Balkans, North Macedonia endorsed the Green Agenda for the 
Western Balkans at the Sofia Summit in December 2020. This year, some progress was made 
in the energy sector, notably with the progress made towards the adoption of the National 
Energy and Climate Plan. However, limited progress were made in transport, environment 
and climate change. The country needs to substantially step-up its ambition to properly 
implement the acquis of chapters 14 and 27. These efforts will increase the efficiency of the 
Economic and Investment Plan and speed up the implementation of the Green Agenda for the 
Western Balkans. Administrative capacities need to be strengthened in all sectors. In addition, 
strategies, action plans and legislation in these sectors need to be coherent with the principles 
and priorities of the Green Agenda and to ensure consistency between relevant sectoral 
documents.  North Macedonia is moderately prepared in most areas of Cluster 5 on 
resources, agriculture and cohesion. It has a good level of preparation in the area of food 
safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy and is at an early stage of preparation in financial 
and budgetary provisions. Over the reporting period, good progress was made in food safety, 
veterinary and phytosanitary5 policy and some progress was made in agriculture and rural 
development. However, further efforts are needed, in particular in areas where limited or no 
                                                          
5 Measures for the control of plant diseases, especially of agricultural crops. 
 
8 
 
progress was made such as fisheries, regional policy and the coordination of structural 
instruments as well as financial and budgetary provisions. 
North Macedonia is moderately prepared in the areas covered by Cluster 6 on external 
relations and has made some progress during the reporting period. In its common commercial 
policy, North Macedonia continued its efforts to coordinate its positions and closely align its 
commercial policies with those of the EU, including within the WTO. However, no progress 
was made in development policy and humanitarian aid. North Macedonia is moderately 
prepared in the area of common foreign, security and defence policy. The country has 
increased its alignment with the EU common foreign and security policy to 96% and its 
participation in EU crisis management missions and operations. 
North Macedonia remains on one of the main transit routes for migration movement. The 
country continues to play a constructive role in the management of mixed migration flows. It 
cooperates effectively with neighbouring countries and EU Member States, including with 
guest officers from the EU Member States on the ground. Efforts to ensure basic living 
conditions and services for all migrants staying in the country continued. The registration of 
migrants and adequate protection-sensitive profiling improved but needs to be carried out in a 
more systematic manner. The Status Agreement with the EU, that would allow the 
deployment of standing corps of the European Border and Coast Guard Agency (Frontex) in 
the country, has not yet been signed due to a bilateral issue. The country should take a more 
methodical approach to fighting the smuggling of migrants. 
 
2. 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
2.1. 
FUNCTIONING OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 
REFORM 
2.1.1. Democracy 
North Macedonia continued its efforts to strengthen democracy and the rule of law, including 
by activating existing checks and balances and through an outreach on key policy and 
legislative issues. Opposition parties remained actively engaged in Parliament and on some 
occasions supported key EU related laws. North Macedonia has shown its commitment to 
deliver in the key areas of the fundamentals, including through the ‘Europe at Home’ agenda 
and the ‘Action Plan 21’ on the fight against corruption. Measures were taken to protect 
public health and contain the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Elections  
The first round of the local elections took place on 17 October 2021. Overall, the legal 
framework remains conducive to the organisation of democratic elections. Limited progress 
was made in addressing the outstanding recommendations from the OSCE/ODIHR and the 
Venice Commission over the reporting period. The Electoral Code was amended during the 
electoral process in September 2021. As mentioned in the previous reports, the 
comprehensive review of the electoral legislation and the adoption of the relevant laws needs 
to be finalised in a timely, inclusive and transparent manner. The state institutions and bodies, 
notably the Ministry of the Interior and the State Election Commission, should make further 
efforts to systematically improve the accuracy of the voters’ lists. 
The first round of the local elections took place on 17 October. In municipalities where no 
mayoral candidate receives the required absolute majority, the second round will be organised 
on 31 October 2021 between the two candidates with the most votes. OSCE/ODIHR has 
deployed an Election Observation Mission. Overall, preparations for the local elections have