3 
 
1. INTRODUCTION1 
1.1. CONTEXT 
Following the first Intergovernmental Conference on accession negotiations on 19 July 
2022, the screening sessions for all six clusters were completed on 7 December 2023. All 
screening reports on the six clusters were presented to the Council. North Macedonia 
continued to implement the Stabilisation and Association Agreement and several joint 
bodies under the agreement met. 
Essential EU-related reforms need to be implemented. North Macedonia maintained good 
relations with other enlargement countries and continued its engagement in regional 
initiatives. Existing bilateral agreements with neighbouring countries need to be 
implemented in good faith by all parties, including the Prespa Agreement with Greece and 
the Treaty of Friendship, Good Neighbourliness and Cooperation with Bulgaria. 
North Macedonia maintained its full alignment with the EU’s common foreign and security 
policy, including on Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, sending a strong signal of 
its strategic choice of EU accession and showing itself to be a reliable partner. 
North Macedonia has actively engaged with the new Growth Plan for the Western Balkans 
and has started to deliver on implementation of the plan’s four pillars of gradual integration 
with the EU single market, regional economic integration, fundamental reforms and 
increased financial support. Under the Reform and Growth Facility, a performance-based EU 
instrument supporting the EU accession process, the country adopted its Reform Agenda, 
which covers reforms in the areas of: (i) governance, public administration reform and public 
financial management; (ii) the green and digital transition; (iii) human capital; (iv) private-
sector development and business environment; and (v) fundamental rights and the rule of 
law. 
The Commission’s 2025 rule of law report covered North Macedonia for the second time2. 
 
1.2. MAIN FINDINGS OF THE REPORT 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
Democracy 
The election legislation provides a suitable framework for holding democratic elections. The 
Electoral Code was amended in March 2024. The review was very limited and not 
transparent. No progress was made on addressing the outstanding recommendations of the 
Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)/Office for Democratic 
Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) and the Venice Commission. 
 
1This report covers the period from 1 September 2024 to 1 September 2025. It is based on input from a variety of 
sources, including contributions from the government of North Macedonia, EU Member States, European 
Parliament reports and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also 
includes the results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the 
area of rule of law. 
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of 
preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made 
during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, 
good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been used. 
2 COM(2025) 900 final. 
 
4 
 
Parliament was found to exercise its powers in an overall effective way. However, political 
polarisation in Parliament persisted, delaying the adoption of important reforms and several 
long-overdue 
appointments. 
Parliament 
maintained 
a 
broad 
consensus 
on 
the 
implementation of the new rules of procedure. These rules have so far had a positive effect 
on Parliament’s operational efficiency; however, their long-term impact is yet to be 
determined. Parliament should accelerate necessary reforms for the EU integration process. 
In addition, Parliament should plan and adopt its agenda diligently and limit the use of 
shortened legislative procedures. Cross-party collaboration remains essential to accelerate 
the implementation of EU-related reforms, which is in the interest of citizens. No attempts 
were made to adopt the relevant constitutional changes referred to in the Council 
Conclusions of 18 July 2022, which the country committed to launch and achieve, with a 
view to ensuring that the Constitution covers citizens who live within the borders of the State 
and who are part of other peoples, such as Bulgarians. Permanent and decisive steps are 
needed to accelerate the implementation of all EU-related reforms beyond those of the 
Reform Agenda and to move forward in the EU accession negotiation process. Cross-party 
collaboration is vital in this regard. 
Despite some progress, a comprehensive reform of local self-government is still urgently 
needed, and the dialogue between different levels of government should be strengthened. 
Inter-ethnic relations remained stable, and the Ohrid Framework Agreement continued to be 
implemented. 
The institutions in charge of the EU integration process are in place. North Macedonia needs 
to continue strengthening its EU negotiating structures and achieve sound coordination 
across line ministries and institutions, while further developing EU acquis-related expertise 
across the public administration. 
Civil society organisations (CSOs) in North Macedonia generally operate in an overall 
enabling environment. The government adopted a decision for appointing members of the 
Council for Cooperation between Government and Civil Society. This development brought 
the Council’s long-awaited reactivation, in line with the Commission’s recommendations. 
Looking ahead, the Council now needs to effectively fulfil its role. The government should 
increase its efforts to ensure that civil society is involved in all priority areas and in 
consultation activities. The necessary amendments to the current legal and financial 
frameworks for ensuring transparent public funding to CSOs have not yet been adopted. 
Public administration reform 
North Macedonia remains moderately prepared in the area of public administration reform.  
Some progress was made in the e-government area, with the amendments to the Law on 
electronic documents, electronic identification and trusted services transposing eIDAS 2.0 
Regulation and introducing the Digital Identity Wallet. Efforts were made towards 
digitalisation of institutional registers, simplification of electronic procedures and increase 
of data exchange. The long-awaited laws on administrative servants and on public sector 
employees were adopted in July 2025. The two laws improve selection procedures, 
temporary employment, working conditions, and data collection in the human resources 
management area. However, rules governing civil servants remain fragmented. The country 
pursued the reorganisation of several state institutions in line with the amended Law on 
state organisation. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt legal provisions governing top management service and start implementing the 
revised Law on administrative servants and the revised Law on public service 
employees; 
 
5 
 
→ finalise the revision of, and continue implementing, the Law on state organisation and 
other related laws, in line with the recommendations on the new organisation of state 
administrative bodies; 
→ ensure full implementation of the Law on general administrative procedures by 
completing the digitalisation of institutional registers and data exchange and 
simplifying electronic procedures. 
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights 
North Macedonia is between having some and a moderate level of preparation in applying 
the EU acquis and European standards in this area. Overall, there was no progress.  
Functioning of the judiciary 
The judicial system of North Macedonia is between having some and a moderate level of 
preparation and made no progress. The country started implementing the Strategy for 
Judicial Reform (2024-2028) and continued to implement the recommendations of the 2023 
peer review mission on the Judicial Council. The overall independence and financial 
autonomy of the judiciary is undermined by the interference and pressure from other state 
branches, including attempts by Parliament to pressure members of the Judicial Council to 
resign, and the limited financial resources allocated. The staffing shortages in the judiciary 
are a concern as it affects the quality and efficiency of the justice system. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only implemented to a limited 
extent and therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in 
particular: 
→ adopt a new Law on civil procedure, in line with European standards, and accelerate 
implementation of the Strategy for Judicial Reform; 
→ strengthen the Judicial Council by adopting a revised legislative framework and 
continue 
increasing 
its 
transparency 
and 
independence, 
in 
line 
with 
the 
recommendations of the 2023 peer review mission and the opinion of the Venice 
Commission, and step up implementation of the human resources strategies for the 
judiciary and the public prosecution service; 
→ ensure that the Automated Court Case Management Information System (ACCMIS) is 
fully functional and compatible with the level of complexity of court cases and the 
method for assessing judges and presidents of courts. 
Fight against corruption 
North Macedonia is between having some and a moderate level of preparation and made no 
progress on the prevention and fight against corruption. Corruption remains prevalent in 
many areas and is an issue of serious concern. The tragedy of 16 March 2025 in Kochani, 
during which a fire tore through a club killing 62 and injuring over 190 people, revealed 
enduring systemic challenges over the enforcement of anti-corruption measures. The 
preventive measures and the effective repression of corruption needs to be improved. The 
indictment imposed on the President of the State Commission for the Prevention of 
Corruption (SCPC), which led to her resignation, have brought the institution’s credibility into 
question. The SCPC needs to proactively provide policy guidance to prevent corruption, 
detect and report alleged instances of corruption and increase its efficiency in verifying 
asset declarations and oversight of election campaign financing. In parallel, its 
recommendations need to be followed up effectively.  
The Public Prosecutor’s Office, the investigative centres and the law enforcement units 
should recruit specialised staff and receive financial support. High-level corruption cases 
 
6 
 
frequently experience delays, reach the statute of limitations, or result in minimal sentences, 
which strengthens public scepticism about the effectiveness of the fight against corruption. 
Targeted risk assessments and specific measures are also needed to address corruption in 
the most vulnerable sectors. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not addressed and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt a new Criminal Code in line with the EU acquis and international standards. 
Improve its track record in high-level corruption cases – with timely, professional, and 
transparent proactive investigations, prosecutions, final convictions, and recovery, 
including confiscation of criminal assets, value-based confiscation, extended 
confiscation and third-party confiscation; 
→ improve implementation of the national strategy for the prevention of corruption and 
conflict of interest, address pending the Council of Europe Group of States against 
Corruption (GRECO) recommendations, and draft the new anti-corruption strategy for 
2026-2030; 
→ allocate sufficient human and financial resources, including financial experts, to: (i) the 
Public Prosecutor’s Office and the Basic Public Prosecutor’s Office for the Prosecution 
of Organised Crime and Corruption to ensure effective accountability in high-level 
corruption cases; and (ii) the State Commission for the Prevention of Corruption to 
improve the verification of assets declarations and the oversight of election campaign 
financing. 
Fundamental rights 
The legal framework on fundamental rights is partially aligned with the EU acquis and 
European standards. The country continues to meet its general obligations on fundamental 
rights, but legislation should be implemented in a systematic manner. A new Ombudsman 
and eight new deputy ombudspersons, for the regional and Skopje offices of the 
Ombudsman, are still to be elected. No progress has been made on the protection of 
personal data. The overall situation, in particular living conditions, in prisons remains 
appalling, although infrastructure was partially renovated and improved in several prison 
facilities. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were addressed to a limited extent and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, the country should in particular: 
→ address the dire conditions in prisons and continue the efforts to promote alternatives 
to incarceration and implement relevant recommendations on detention conditions 
made by national and international institutions, notably by the European Committee for 
the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT); 
→ ensure that the Ombudsman’s Office and the Commission for the Prevention and 
Protection against Discrimination receive sufficient financial and human resources 
enabling them to function independently and effectively; 
→ provide adequate support to vulnerable categories of children, especially child victims 
of violence, Roma3 children and children with disabilities. 
Freedom of expression 
 
3 In line with the terminology of European institutions, the umbrella term ‘Roma’ is used here to refer to a number 
of different groups, without denying the specificities of these groups. 
 
7 
 
North Macedonia is between having some and a moderate level of preparation on freedom 
of expression and has made limited progress in this area. The legal framework governing 
the media is still not fully aligned with EU acquis, particularly the European Media Freedom 
Act (EMFA), although some progress was achieved on the Law on media. The financial 
independence of the Agency for Audio and Audiovisual Media Services has improved, and 
the new members of its Council were elected by Parliament. The public service broadcaster 
faces challenges, despite improvements in its funding and the appointment by the 
Parliament of its Council. Challenges remain concerning transparency of media ownership. 
The framework for allocation of state advertising raises concerns about the potential 
misuse of political funds and the disruption of the market. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, the country should in particular: 
→ continue to revise the legal framework governing the media to align it with the EU acquis 
and European standards, particularly by introducing rules on full transparency in media 
ownership and allocation of public funds for state advertising, competition and State 
aid, and intellectual property rights; 
→ implement the strategy to reform the Public Broadcaster; 
→ continue to promptly address all threats and acts of violence against journalists and 
ensure perpetrators are brought to justice. 
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security 
North Macedonia is moderately prepared to implement the EU acquis in the field of justice, 
freedom and security and has made limited progress in this area. North Macedonia should 
increase its capacities to fight all forms of serious and organised crime. On migration and 
asylum, there was no further alignment with the EU acquis.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met and remain valid. In the 
coming year the country should in particular: 
→ continue to proactively reform the structures responsible for fighting organised and 
financial crimes and money laundering, with a focus on increasing operational capacity 
and cooperation and confiscating property when warranted; 
→ ensure effective implementation and monitoring of the national strategies for 
countering terrorism (2023-2027) and countering violent extremism (2023-2027), and of 
the joint action plan on counterterrorism; 
→ systematically register migrants, improve protection-sensitive profiling and adopt a 
more systematic approach to fighting migrant smuggling. 
Fight against serious and organised crime 
North Macedonia is in between having some and a moderate level of preparation in the fight 
against serious and organised crime and has made limited progress in this area. Further 
progress on alignment with the EU acquis is still expected. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially met and remain 
valid. In the coming year the country should in particular: 
→ improve its track record of investigations, prosecutions and convictions in all fields of 
serious and organised crime, money laundering cases and financial crimes, with a focus 
on asset recovery and confiscation of the proceeds of crimes; 
 
8 
 
→ strengthen the human and financial capacity of law enforcement agencies investigating 
organised and serious crimes, financial crimes and money laundering, and of the Asset 
Recovery Office and the Agency for Management of Confiscated Property; 
→ align its legislation on weapons, narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances with the 
EU acquis. 
ECONOMIC CRITERIA 
The existence of a functioning market economy 
North Macedonia has made limited progress and is at a good level of preparation in 
developing a functioning market economy. Real GDP growth accelerated in 2024, driven by 
private consumption and public investment. The external position deteriorated and inflation, 
after falling substantially, has surged again since September 2024. The 2024 fiscal deficit 
exceeded the initial plan as a result of rising public sector wages and pensions, delaying 
fiscal consolidation and adherence to the fiscal rules. The execution of planned capital 
expenditure continues to suffer from weak public investment management. Efforts to 
formalise the informal economy have stalled. The central bank started to cautiously ease 
monetary policy and the macroprudential framework was strengthened. The banking sector 
remained resilient amidst a solid rise in credit growth. The labour market situation improved, 
but structural problems persist, including low participation rates, substantial emigration and 
a large gender gap. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt the remaining implementing legislation for the organic budget law and ensure 
compliance with the fiscal rules, including by adopting further revenue-enhancing 
measures and controlling current spending; 
→ accelerate the implementation of the public investment management action plan and 
adopt the Law on public-private partnership; 
→ adopt and implement a revised action plan for formalising the informal economy. 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union 
North Macedonia has made some progress and is moderately prepared to cope with 
competitive pressure and market forces within the EU. A new Law on vocational education 
and training includes some measures to address significant skills mismatches. The 
digitalisation of the economy is advancing, and new school curricula provide for better 
teaching of IT skills. Sizeable investment needs in transport and energy infrastructure 
persist. Projects to improve road and rail infrastructure and to digitalise public services have 
progressed somewhat but need to be strengthened to have a positive impact on the 
competitiveness of domestic companies. The share of energy production from renewable 
sources increased further. Integration with the EU in trade and investment, as well as overall 
trade openness, remained high in 2024. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not fully implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ increase financial and human resources to speed up the vocational education and 
training system reforms and implement the Law on secondary education; 
→ complete key projects in transport infrastructure, such as on Road Corridors VIII and X; 
→ increase the use of renewable energy sources, including by adopting a new law on 
renewable energy sources. 
 
9 
 
Chapter 5: Public procurement 
North Macedonia is moderately prepared in the area of public procurement. Limited 
progress was made since the last reporting period with the updated version of the electronic 
public procurement system. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt the Law on public-private partnership and the Law on concessions, to further align 
the legal framework in these areas with the EU acquis; 
→ increase competition and the use of most economically advantageous tender (MEAT) 
criteria for the award of contracts, and improve the monitoring and controls of public 
procurement procedures through reporting on and the follow-up of irregularities, cases 
of conflict of interest and fraudulent practices; 
→ strengthen controls in public procurement and improve coordination among key 
stakeholders to fight corruption and strengthen their capacities to implement the 
principles of transparency, free competition, equal treatment and non-discrimination. 
Chapter 18: Statistics 
The country is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of statistics. 
Some progress was made, mainly on labour market statistics and the robust transmission 
of statistical data. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not fully implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ complete preparatory work for the agricultural census to be conducted in 2026; 
→ continue ensuring sufficient staffing and financial resources for the State Statistical 
Office; 
→ continue to improve macroeconomic statistics, particularly by making sure that 
statistics are transparent, increasing the consistency, timeliness and coverage of the 
excessive deficit procedure and government finance statistics, and by further aligning 
financial accounts and quarterly national accounts with the European System of 
Accounts 2010 (ESA 2010). 
Chapter 32: Financial control 
The country is moderately prepared in the area of financial control. Some progress has been 
made with the adoption of the Public Internal Financial Control (PIFC) law, after more than 
four years of parliamentary procedure. The independence of the State Audit Office (SAO) is 
still not guaranteed by the Constitution. The efficiency of parliamentary oversight and follow-
up of audit recommendations need to improve. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
remain mostly valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ ensure the timely implementation of the PIFC law in order to strengthen the institutional 
capacity of internal audit units, managerial accountability and sound financial 
management; 
→ adopt the State audit law to strengthen the State Audit Office’s independence. Improve 
parliamentary scrutiny over individual audit reports, and strengthen the follow-up to SAO 
recommendations; 
 
10 
 
→ strengthen the institutional capacity of the financial inspection and the Anti-Fraud 
Coordination Service Network (AFCOS) and improve the prevention, management and 
reporting of irregularities that affect EU funds. 
 
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET 
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods 
North Macedonia is moderately prepared on the free movement of goods. No progress was 
made in the reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt the Law on market surveillance and the implementing legislation necessary to 
complete alignment with the EU General Products Safety Directive; 
→ adopt a new strategy for the free movement of goods, which should include planning for 
a significant increase in human resources for legal and policy development and the 
implementation of the EU acquis in this chapter; 
→ adopt a new action plan to eliminate the non-tariff barriers to trade and ensure 
compliance with Articles 34-36 of the Treaty on Functioning of the European Union and 
then start the implementation of this action plan. 
Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers 
North Macedonia is at an early stage of preparation on the freedom of movement for 
workers, and no progress was made in this area. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ strengthen the capacity of the Employment Service Agency, by continuing to organise 
training, and further align legislation and the exchange of good practices, in line with the 
European Employment Services (EURES) and European Labour Authority (ELA) 
regulations; 
→ continue to align the legal framework to the EU acquis on access to the labour market, 
particularly to rules on non-discrimination on grounds of nationality against EU workers 
in all sectors; 
→ continue to negotiate and conclude bilateral agreements on social security coordination 
and healthcare insurance with EU Member States and put in place administrative 
measures to prepare for accession and for electronic exchange of social security data. 
Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services 
On the right of establishment and the freedom to provide services, North Macedonia is 
moderately prepared. It made limited progress, notably through continuing to align sectoral 
legislation with the Services Directive. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ intensify the implementation of the 2024-2026 Action plan to address non-compliance 
of listed sectoral laws with the Law on services by adopting cross-sector amendments; 
 
11 
 
→ finalise alignment with the EU acquis on postal services and ensure sufficient capacity 
to monitor and enforce the new postal market rules; 
→ align with the EU acquis on mutual recognition of professional qualifications, in 
particular the amended Directive on recognition of professional qualifications and the 
Directive on a proportionality test before adoption of new regulation of professions. 
Chapter 4: Free movement of capital 
North Macedonia is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of free 
movement of capital. Good progress was made on payment services and the fight against 
money laundering and terrorist financing (AML/CTF). North Macedonia joined the 
geographical scope of the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) schemes in March 2025. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, North Macedonia should build on this progress and in particular: 
→ further liberalise any remaining restrictions in the area of capital movement and 
payments; 
→ ensure full compliance of the Law on payment services and payment systems with the 
EU acquis; 
→ ensure full compliance of the Law on AML/CFT, continue developing implementing 
legislation complementing the national AML/CTF legal framework as well as implement 
further Financial Action Task Force (FATF/MONEYVAL) recommendations. 
Chapter 6: Company law 
The country has a good level of preparation in the field of company law. No progress was 
made during the reporting period. The country needs to step up efforts to align its legislation 
with the EU acquis in this area. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→  align the national legislation with the EU acquis on encouraging long-term shareholder 
engagement; 
→  align its national legislation with the Directives on cross-border conversions, mergers 
and divisions and on the use of digital tools and processes in company law; 
→  adopt legislation on accounting and audit to align with the latest EU acquis in these 
areas, including by strengthening the role and capacity of the Council for Advancement 
and Oversight of Audit. 
Chapter 7: Intellectual property law 
North Macedonia remains moderately prepared in the area of intellectual property law. No 
progress was made over the reporting period. Further efforts are needed to align the 
legislation with the EU acquis in this area. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ further improve the legal framework on copyright and related rights, notably by aligning 
with the Directive on collective rights management, the Directive on the term of 
protection of copyright and certain related rights, the Orphan Works Directive, the 
Marrakesh Directive and Regulation, as well as with the Directives on online 
transmissions of broadcasting organisations and retransmissions of television and 
radio programmes (SatCab II) and on the Digital Single Market (DSM); 
 
12 
 
→ further improve the legal framework on industrial property rights, by aligning with the 
Directive on the enforcement of intellectual property rights and with the Directive on 
trade secrets; 
→ implement the national intellectual property strategy and make operational the online 
information platform for law enforcement institutions to exchange data on intellectual 
property rights. 
Chapter 8: Competition policy 
The country is moderately prepared in the area of competition. No progress was made in 
the reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ further align the legislative framework, in particular the implementing legislation on 
State aid and antitrust, with the EU acquis; 
→ ensure full transparency of State aid granted by the authorities; 
→ strengthen the administrative and financial capacity of the national competition 
authority. 
Chapter 9: Financial services 
The country remained moderately prepared in the area of financial services. Some progress 
was made with the adoption of legislation aiming to align with the Bank Recovery and 
Resolution Directive (BRRD). In line with last year’s recommendations, the implementing 
legislation was adopted for the Law on financial instruments and the Law on prospectuses 
and transparency of security issuers. The country continued efforts to align with the 
financial market infrastructures acquis. 
As one of the Commission’s recommendations from last year was not implemented, and 
one was partially addressed, these recommendations remain valid (see the first two 
recommendations below). In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ continue to align the banking legislation with the revised versions of the Capital 
Requirements Regulation and the Capital Requirements Directive (as amended by 
CRR3/CRD6) and with the Deposit Guarantee Schemes Directive (DGSD); 
→ align with the Solvency II Directive, particularly pillars 1 and 3; 
→ step up adoption of the law on investment funds and continue efforts to align with the 
financial market infrastructures acquis. 
Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection 
North Macedonia remains moderately prepared in the area of consumer and health 
protection. Some progress was made, as the country adopted legislation designed to be 
aligned with the EU acquis on consumer rights, and on the marking of goods offered to 
consumers. It also ratified the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products and 
slightly increased the funding for rare diseases. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt the 2025-2028 consumer protection strategy, set up a web platform to inform the 
public on consumer issues, and strengthen market surveillance capacity; 
→ ensure effective tobacco control by properly implementing the relevant EU acquis, and 
 
13 
 
complete alignment with the EU acquis on medicinal products for human use and 
veterinary use); 
→ make eHealth data interoperable with Health Insurance Fund data, and increase funding, 
awareness and human resources in the area of health, particularly for cancer detection. 
 
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH 
Chapter 10: Digital transformation and media 
The country is moderately prepared in the area of digital transformation and media. Some 
progress was made to harmonise the legal framework with the EU acquis as part of the 
Reform Agenda commitments, by adopting a cybersecurity strategy and with a slight 
increase in electronic services available to citizens and businesses.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ Continue aligning with the European Electronic Communications Code, the EU Gigabit 
Infrastructure Act (GIA) the EU Directive on security of network and information systems 
(the NIS2 Directive) and the 5G cybersecurity toolbox; 
→ increase efforts to strengthen the independence and capacity of the media regulator, 
the public service broadcaster and the regulator on electronic communication; 
→ continue to improve the 112 emergency number service by ensuring sufficient human 
resources. 
Chapter 16: Taxation 
North Macedonia remains moderately prepared in the area of taxation. Limited progress 
was made, in particular by adopting a new Law on minimum global corporate profit tax, 
bringing it in line with OECD global minimum tax (GMT) and Council Directive (EU) 
2022/2523. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ further align legislation with the EU acquis on VAT, excise duties and direct taxation, and 
put in place a transparent and effective VAT refund process; 
→ start preparations to put in place a mechanism to effectively implement the automatic 
exchange of tax information with EU Member States, in line with the OECD Global 
Standard; 
→ develop a new integrated IT tax system, improve its compliance risk management, step 
up the strategic reform of the national authority, and start preparations for 
interconnection and interoperability with the common EU taxation IT systems. 
Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy 
The country is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of 
economic and monetary policy and some progress was made. Last year’s 
recommendations were partly implemented by appointing members of the Fiscal Council, 
and steps are being taken to ensure the central bank’s independence, notably by revising 
the legal framework setting out employment conditions for its personnel. However, the 
central bank’s financial independence was challenged by an amendment to the central 
bank law that changed the profit retention mechanism, impacting the central bank’s ability 
to build general reserves from profits.  
 
14 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ ensure the timely implementation of the reforms envisaged in the organic budget law, 
including the roll-out of the Integrated Financial Management Information System 
(IFMIS), the revision and entry into force of the new budget classifications and the 
putting into practice of the Public Investment Management Decree; 
→ strengthen the central bank’s independence by adopting the pending laws on 
administrative servants and the Law on public-sector employees. 
Chapter 19: Social policy and employment 
The country remains moderately prepared in the area of social policy and employment. 
Some progress was made by further reducing the unemployment rate and increasing social 
assistance benefits. The countrywide implementation of the Youth Guarantee Scheme 
continued. The poverty rate remains significantly high. Capacity building for social partners 
needs to continue. North Macedonia needs to continue aligning with the EU acquis on non-
discrimination and equality, including gender equality.   
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ take steps to align national legislation with EU acquis and standards on equality and non-
discrimination in employment, including also EU Gender Equality acquis in regard to the 
provisions of the Work-Life Balance Directive, the Pay Transparency, and the Women on 
Boards; 
→ continue to implement labour market activation strategies for young people, the long-
term unemployed and low-skilled individuals, as well as for women, persons with 
disabilities and Roma, and ensure that these measures are properly evaluated; 
→ increase the capacity of the State Labour Inspectorate to tackle issues pertaining to 
occupational safety and health, set up a system to monitor work-related injuries and 
deaths, and strengthen bipartite social dialogue between employers and workers; set up 
a monitoring and evaluation framework for social services and advance the social 
protection reform, creating stronger connections with employment activation initiatives 
and strengthen social dialogue. 
Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy 
The country is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of enterprise 
and industrial policy. No progress has been made as the Commission’s recommendations 
from last year were not implemented. Hence in the coming year, North Macedonia should: 
→ implement the plan to consolidate the institutional structure and the mandates of public 
bodies; 
→ adopt the strategy for the development of small and medium-sized companies (SMEs); 
and boost export readiness and the integration of companies in supply chains by 
stepping up efforts to implement the export promotion strategy; 
→ improve the process of consulting enterprises during the preparation of measures and 
inform them with sufficient lead time about implementation conditions. 
Chapter 25: Science and research 
The country has a good level of preparation in the area of science and research. Good 
progress was made in rolling out measures from the Action Plan 2024-2025 of the Smart 
 
15 
 
Specialisation Strategy 2024-2027. North Macedonia also achieved good uptake for the 
Horizon Europe and European Cooperation in Science and Technology (COST) programmes, 
set up the European Digital Innovation Hub, and increased state funding for science. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ increase investment for science and research in line with the new European Research 
Area priorities; 
→ continue to promote and increase participation in Horizon Europe; 
→ provide support to companies via the European Digital Innovation Hub EDIH. 
Chapter 26: Education and culture 
North Macedonia is moderately prepared in the area of education and culture. Limited 
progress was made. Work on the 2018-2025 education strategy and on developing a proper 
monitoring system continued to be slow. The Law on adult education and the Law on 
vocational education and training (VET) were adopted, while the adoption of a new Law on 
secondary education was delayed and replaced by a number of amendments to the existing 
Law. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt a new Law on secondary education, develop implementing legislation on the Law 
on adult education and on VET, and continue to set up regional VET centres and ensure 
they are operational; 
→ improve access to quality education for all, in particular for children with disabilities and 
children from Roma communities, further develop teachers’ skills and invest in their 
continuous professional development; 
→ optimise the school network, adopt and apply the new formulas for financing primary 
education, complete and apply similar formulas for secondary, VET and higher 
education. 
Chapter 29: Customs union 
North Macedonia has a good level of preparation in this area. Good progress was made in 
the reporting period, in particular through the consolidation and upgrade of IT systems. The 
New Computerised Transit System (NCTS) Phase 5 development was completed and 
launched in January 2025. The Customs Administration implements a fully paperless 
environment for processing customs declarations and excise documents. The Protocol on 
Elimination of Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products was ratified in December 2024. The 
Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a large extent. In the 
coming year, North Macedonia should focus on: 
→ continuing to consolidate and apply its national customs IT systems in line with the 
Commission’s Union Customs Code (UCC) work programme and multiannual strategic 
plan (MASP) modules and ensure their upgrade;  
→ ensure continued alignment of the customs legislation with the EU acquis and upgrade 
its national component of the New Computerised Transit System (NCTS) to Phase 6; 
→ strengthen combating customs fraud, in particular smuggling of tobacco products, also 
by cooperating with the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF). 
 
16 
 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY 
Chapter 14: Transport policy 
The country is moderately prepared in the area of transport. Some progress was made, 
notably on multimodal transport, with the preparatory work for the Trubarevo multimodal 
node advancing well. Key technical studies and preliminary design with tendering 
documentation are in the final stages of completion. The sector inspection bodies still lack 
administrative and operational capacity. The Commission’s recommendations from last 
year were partially implemented and therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North 
Macedonia should in particular: 
→ ensure that inspection bodies have qualified operational and administrative capacity 
and develop their enforcement capacity to reduce crashes and fatalities in road and rail 
transport; 
→ implement the connectivity reform measures for road and rail, and finalise pending 
border-crossing agreements/protocols to facilitate the flow of traffic and goods; 
→ adopt and implement legislation on multimodal and intelligent transport systems (ITS) 
for road and rail and on electronic freight transport information. 
Chapter 15: Energy 
North Macedonia is moderately prepared in the area of energy. Some progress was made, 
notably through the adoption of the Just Transition annual implementation plan for 2025 
and the new energy law. The legislation on renewable energy and energy efficiency still 
needs to be aligned with the latest EU acquis. The country needs to accelerate its transition 
towards green energy and reduce its dependence on coal. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ ensure sufficient human resources and institutional capacities for the Ministry of 
Energy, Mining and Mineral Resources; 
→ finalise adoption and start implementing the legislation on the electricity integration 
package, on renewable energy and energy efficiency, in line with the obligations under 
the Energy Community Treaty; 
→ implement the National Energy Action Plan, the National Energy and Climate Plan, the 
Just Transition Roadmap, and improve reporting on implementation by setting up an 
adequate data collection system. 
Chapter 21: Trans-European networks 
North Macedonia has a good level of preparation in the area of trans-European networks. 
Limited progress was made during the reporting period, by the opening of the Gradkso-
Drenovo highway and the Stracin-Kriva Palanka Road. Cooperation between North 
Macedonia and Bulgaria on the construction of the rail connection along Corridor VIII has 
improved.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ strengthen the operational and technical capacity of all management and stakeholder 
institutions dealing with the development of both the trans-European transport (TEN-T) 
and trans-European energy (TEN-E) networks, harmonise the legal framework and 
increase compliance with the Trans-European Network Regulation; 
 
17 
 
→ mobilise sufficient resources to implement the goals and deadlines set out in the 
Transport Community’s five-year rolling work plan for the development of the TEN-T 
extension; 
→ make the Railway Border-Crossing Protocol signed with Kosovo operational, finalise the 
mutual agreement for border crossings procedures with Greece, and accelerate 
progress on the construction and completion of the rail connection along Corridor VIII 
with Bulgaria. 
Chapter 27: Environment and climate change 
North Macedonia has some level of preparation in this area. Limited progress was made 
during the reporting period, by adopting the law on industrial emissions and amending the 
law on environment to ratify the amendments of the Espoo Convention. Implementation and 
enforcement are lagging behind in all sectors. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain mostly valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should, in particular: 
→ strengthen administrative and inspection capacities to implement and enforce the 
environmental acquis, and implement structural reforms in all sectors, with special 
focus on civil protection operational capacity and coordination with the Union Civil 
Protection Mechanism; 
→ ensure the functioning of the regional waste management structures and enable 
implementation of infrastructure investments to establish a regional waste 
management system in the Northeastern and Eastern regions; 
→ adopt the Law on climate change, implement the National Energy and Climate Plan 
(NECP), align with and implement the Monitoring, Reporting, Verification and 
Accreditation (MRVA) acquis and make the climate change unit within the Ministry of 
Environment and Physical Planning operational. 
 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION 
Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development 
North Macedonia remains moderately prepared in the area of agriculture and rural 
development. Some progress was made during the reporting period, notably on the 
Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance for Rural Development (IPARD) II and IPARD III. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year’s report were not fully implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ prioritise finalising the new Law on agriculture and rural development to strengthen its 
policy framework in the areas of agriculture support and common market organisation; 
→ ensure the interoperability of various elements from the Integrated Administration and 
Control System (IACS), verify data accuracy and transfer the farm register and the Land 
Parcel Identification System (LPIS) to the Paying Agency; 
→ improve the human resources policy and the administrative capacity in the IPARD 
operating structures to ensure robust implementation of the IPARD III programme. 
Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy 
North Macedonia has a good level of preparation in the area of food safety, veterinary and 
phytosanitary policy. Some progress was made over the reporting period, particularly in 
 
18 
 
fighting animal diseases, plant health control and implementing pest eradication measures 
based on the results of phytosanitary monitoring programmes. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt the draft law on official controls and the new Law on animal health, and continue 
to approximate national rules with EU animal welfare legislation; prepare a national plan 
to upgrade establishments producing food, feed and animal by-products to meet EU 
structural standards; 
→ strengthen capacity for data analysis and improve structures ensuring correct 
implementation of the General Food Law Regulation, particularly with regards to the 
distinction between risk assessment and risk management within the Food and 
Veterinary Agency; 
→ implement measures on the sustainable use of pesticides. 
Chapter 13: Fisheries and aquaculture 
North Macedonia is moderately prepared in the area of fisheries and aquaculture. Some 
progress was made during the reporting period on strengthening checks on illegal fishing 
and administrative structure for policy management. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ adopt the implementing legislation on marketing standards, consumer information, 
traceability and producer organisations, as well as a national strategic plan on 
aquaculture; 
→ improve the data collection system and reporting, by setting up a data framework to 
collect data on fisheries and aquaculture, including information on catches of European 
eel both in recreational and in commercial fishing and providing an analysis of its 
consequences; 
→ improve the controls of fish stock management and of illegal, unreported and 
unregulated (IUU) fishing by introducing a catch certification system. 
Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments 
North Macedonia is moderately prepared in the area of regional policy and coordination of 
structural instruments. Limited progress was made during the reporting period, notably by 
improving policy dialogue. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ upgrade its institutional, administrative and technical capacity to manage EU funds by 
adopting the necessary staff retention policy and regulations, strengthening capacities, 
improving the implementation of EU and audit recommendations, and stepping up 
interinstitutional cooperation; 
→ strengthen public investment by adopting the Law on public-private partnerships and 
ensure the fast operationalisation of the reforms envisaged in the Decree on public 
investment management; 
→ accelerate the decentralisation process by putting in place a credible financing 
framework for municipalities and by strengthening policy dialogue on regional 
 
19 
 
development; this includes adopting a new plan to implement the Regional Development 
Strategy for the period 2025-2027. 
Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions 
Preparations under this chapter are at an early stage. Limited progress was made over the 
reporting period. National accounts and gross national income calculations need to be 
further aligned with the EU acquis. All customs declarations and excise documents are 
electronically processed, but the institutional set-up necessary for the efficient functioning 
of the own resources system is yet to be established. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not fully implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ improve the legal basis and methodological tools for the own resources system; 
→ continue aligning data on national accounts with ESA 2010 and improving the 
comprehensiveness of data transmission to Eurostat; 
→ strengthen the administrative capacities of and coordination mechanisms for key 
stakeholders. 
 
CLUSTER 6: EXTERNAL RELATIONS 
Chapter 30: External relations 
The country has a good level of preparation in the area of external relations and made some 
progress during the reporting period, in particular in implementing the Central European Free 
Trade Agreement (CEFTA) protocols and in efforts to develop its export control system. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ put in place a legal framework on international cooperation and development policy and 
on humanitarian aid for non-EU countries, in line with EU policies and principles; 
→ continue to implement commitments under the new Common Regional Market (CRM) 
action plan for 2025-2028, further implement CEFTA Protocol 6 on Trade in Services, 
and take the necessary steps to implement CEFTA Protocol 7 on Dispute Settlement: 
→ align future national legislation on foreign investments with the EU FDI Screening 
Regulation. 
Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy 
North Macedonia has a good level of preparation in the area of common foreign, security 
and defence policy. Good progress was made, as the country maintained its track record of 
full alignment with relevant High Representative statements on behalf of the EU and relevant 
Council decisions, including EU restrictive measures related to Russia’s war of aggression 
against Ukraine. North Macedonia continued to participate in EU crisis management 
missions and operations. In November 2024, the country signed a Security and Defence 
Partnership with the EU. 
The recommendations from last year were implemented to a great extent and remain 
partially valid. In the coming year, North Macedonia should in particular: 
→ maintain full alignment with the EU common foreign and security policy; 
→ further strengthen its capacity to implement and enforce the sanctions in place; 
 
20 
 
→ align its national small arms and light weapons (SALW) strategy with the revised 
Roadmap for the control of SALW in the Western Balkans (2025-2030). 
 
1.3. STATE OF PLAY OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
Following the first Intergovernmental Conference on accession negotiations with North 
Macedonia of 19 July 2022, the Commission immediately launched the analytical 
examination of the EU acquis – the ‘screening’ process. The meetings were completed in 
December 2023 and all screening reports on the six clusters were presented to the Council. 
The Council outlined to North Macedonia the terms for opening accession negotiations on 
the first cluster (fundamentals) once the constitutional amendments are adopted. In 
response, in December 2023, the authorities of North Macedonia adopted the roadmaps on 
the rule of law and public administration reform. The authorities continued to work on the 
roadmaps on the rule of law, public administration reform and the functioning of democratic 
institutions, and the action plan on the protection of minorities. It is important for North 
Macedonia to advance and finalise all the preparatory work related to the opening 
benchmarks for the fundamentals cluster.