3 
 
1.  
INTRODUCTION  
1.1.  
CONTEXT   
Implementation of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) between North 
Macedonia and the European Union, which entered into force in April 2004, continued. Since 
2009, the Commission has continuously recommended that the Council open accession 
negotiations with North Macedonia, a candidate country since 2005. In March 2020, the 
European Council endorsed the Council’s decision to open accession negotiations with North 
Macedonia1. On 19 July 2022, the first Intergovernmental Conference on accession 
negotiations took place with North Macedonia, following the approval of the Negotiating 
Framework by the Council. The Commission immediately launched the analytical review of 
the EU acquis (screening) process, which is the first step in the negotiating process.  
The authorities have continued to demonstrate, including publicly, their commitment to 
advancing on their EU path. North Macedonia has also fully aligned with the EU positions on 
the war in Ukraine, demonstrating thereby once more that it is a reliable partner. The 
country’s existing challenges have been exacerbated by the impact of the COVID-19 
pandemic and by new risks stemming from Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, including 
high energy, commodity and food prices, combined with supply-chain disruptions. North 
Macedonia has taken measures to mitigate the impact of the war.   
1.2.  
SUMMARY OF THE REPORT2  
The reporting period was characterised by intense efforts, which led to the start of the 
accession negotiation process. The holding of the first Intergovernmental Conference in July 
2022 was a historic moment and marked a new phase in the EU accession process for North 
Macedonia. This was a clear recognition of the determination of North Macedonia to 
implement EU related reforms.  
On the political criteria, North Macedonia continued its efforts to strengthen democracy and 
the rule of law, despite some challenges. The country has shown its commitment to 
continuing to deliver results in key areas of the fundamentals. Local elections took place in 
October 2021. The Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the Organisation 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE/ODIHR) assessed that they were competitive 
and fundamental freedoms were widely respected. However, limited progress was made over 
the reporting period in addressing the outstanding recommendations made by the 
OSCE/ODIHR and the Venice Commission. As mentioned in the previous reports, the 
electoral legislation should be comprehensively reviewed to address existing inconsistencies 
and the relevant laws need to be adopted in a timely, inclusive and transparent manner, well 
before the next elections. In this regard, the authorities need to step up their efforts and show 
political will to further improve the electoral process. 
The work of Parliament was marred by political polarisation, which delayed the adoption of 
many pieces of legislation. Following intense debates, Parliament adopted conclusions on the 
proposal which paved the way for the opening of accession negotiations. Parliament needs to 
                                                            
1 https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/43076/26-vc-euco-statement-en.pdf 
2 This report covers the period from June 2021 to June 2022. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from the government of North Macedonia, the EU Member States, European Parliament 
reports and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. This also includes the 
results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in rule of law. 
The report uses the following assessment scales to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of 
preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made 
during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some 
progress, good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, also interim steps have been used. 
 
4 
 
play an active and positive role in the EU accession negotiation process. Joint and prompt 
efforts by all parties are needed as a matter of priority to strengthen Parliament’s role as a 
forum for constructive political dialogue, particularly on the EU reform agenda. Parliament 
and government committed to launch and achieve as a matter of priority the relevant 
constitutional changes, with a view to including in the Constitution citizens who live within 
the borders of the state. Proper planning and consultations are necessary to limit the use of 
fast-track procedures in order to allow for effective scrutiny of and consultation on legislation. 
Oversight of the executive through parliamentary questions to ministers should be conducted 
on a more regular basis. The proposals for internal reform of Parliament agreed during the 
third round of the ‘Jean Monnet Dialogue’ in early 2020 should be implemented without 
further delay. Criminal responsibility for those who orchestrated or committed violence in the 
attack on Parliament on 27 April 2017 continued to be established, including with second 
instance verdicts. The government continued to work on the EU reform agenda and on 
addressing the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic and of the war in Ukraine. Decisive 
efforts are needed to build momentum for reforms and move forward on the EU accession 
negotiation process. Particular focus is needed on ensuring the effective implementation of 
existing legislation rather than launching ad hoc initiatives. Inter-ethnic relations remained 
stable and the Ohrid Framework Agreement continued to be implemented. 
Civil society organisations (CSOs) continue to operate in an enabling environment, including 
with the adoption of the strategy of cooperation with and development of civil society 2022-
2024. Civil society continued to play an important role in decision-making processes and in 
monitoring the activities of the state. However, efforts are needed to improve transparency in 
policymaking and the inclusiveness of consultation processes. The legal and financial 
frameworks still need to be improved and implemented in practice. 
North Macedonia implemented a comprehensive reform of its intelligence services. 
However, the country needs to strengthen its capacity for parliamentary oversight over the 
intelligence services. 
North Macedonia remains moderately prepared in terms of its public administration reform. 
It made limited progress in implementing last year’s recommendations. It adopted the new 
2022-2025 public financial management reform programme. However, the adoption of the 
legislation on organisation and operation of state administrative bodies and the new legal 
framework for human resources management (revision of the Law on Administrative Servants 
and the Law on Public Service Employees and a new Law on Top Management Service) have 
been delayed. The new framework aims to improve the management of human resources 
across the administration and provide greater assurance for merit-based recruitment, 
promotion and dismissal, including at senior management level. The new organic budget law 
was adopted in September 2022. The State Commission for Prevention of Corruption has 
been proactive in addressing cases of nepotism, cronyism and political influence in the 
process of recruiting public sector employees and in appointing members of supervisory and 
management boards.  
The judicial system of North Macedonia has achieved some level of preparation / is 
moderately prepared. Some progress was achieved in the field of the judiciary, through the 
steady implementation of the judicial reform strategy, thereby addressing the 
recommendations made by the Venice Commission and the Senior Experts’ Group on 
systemic rule of law issues. The preparation of a new judicial reform strategy has started, in 
an inclusive manner, building upon the lessons learnt from the previous one. Implementation 
of the updated action plan on the judicial reform strategy has continued but needs to become 
more systematic. The judiciary has demonstrated its commitment to protect its integrity and 
independence. The pace of implementation of the human resources strategies for the judiciary 
 
5 
 
and prosecution services needs to be stepped up. Judicial institutions have implemented 
consistently the new rules for the appointment, promotion, discipline and dismissal of judges 
and prosecutors. Promotions in the higher courts faced a delay and scheduled retirements 
further decreased the number of judges and prosecutors.  The Judicial Council and the 
Council of Public Prosecutors continued implementing the strategic plans. Any new draft law 
on the Academy for Judges and Prosecutors should maintain the Academy as the sole entry 
point to the judiciary and prosecution and should ensure that access to these professions is fair 
and transparent. Work was undertaken to upgrade the software system aiming at putting into 
practice the provisions of the Law on case flow management for automatic and random 
distribution of cases in the courts, through the automated court case management information 
system (ACCMIS). 
The country has achieved some level of preparation / is moderately prepared in the prevention 
and fight against corruption. Some progress has been made as the country continued to 
consolidate its performance on investigating, prosecuting and trying several corruption cases, 
including at a high level. The cases initiated by the former Special Prosecutor’s Office (SPO) 
continued to move forward, establishing accountability for the illegal wiretaps. A number of 
cases were subject to first-instance rulings. In line with previous years’ recommendations, the 
State Commission for the Prevention of Corruption (SCPC) has been proactive in providing 
policy guidance to public institutions on preventing corruption and it opened several cases, 
including cases against high-level officials. The conclusions of its regular reports should be 
addressed in full. Efforts to improve the functioning of the SCPC should continue with a 
further allocation of financial and human resources. Additional human and financial resources 
should be made available to the Public Prosecution Office, investigative centres and law 
enforcements units in charge of investigating corruption. Sectors most vulnerable to 
corruption require targeted risk assessments and dedicated actions. 
North Macedonia has some level of preparation in the fight against organised crime. It has 
made some progress, mainly in operational cooperation with international partners, as well as 
in improving the coordination of activities to combat organised crime. More needs to be done 
to improve the effectiveness of law enforcement in fighting certain forms of crime, such as 
money laundering and financial crimes. The investigative centres at the Basic Public 
Prosecution Office need to be strengthened to achieve their objectives of increasing the 
efficiency of investigations and improving coordination between prosecutors, the police and 
other relevant bodies. 
Some progress has been made in the fight against terrorism and preventing/countering 
violent extremism in line with the objectives set out in the joint action plan on counter-
terrorism for the Western Balkans and the bilateral implementing arrangement. A national 
strategy for the prevention of money laundering and financing terrorism (2021-2023) was 
adopted in 2021. Work should continue on reintegration and resocialisation of returnees as 
well as on de-radicalisation in prisons.  
The legal framework on the protection of fundamental rights is largely in line with European 
standards. The deinstitutionalisation process is progressing with the resettlement of persons 
with disabilities to community-based care. The Ministry of Labour and Social Policy 
continues to invest in community services, including support for victims of gender-based 
violence. It is of particular importance to implement all the provisions of the Law on 
prevention and protection from violence against women and domestic violence. Continued 
improvements can be noted in gender mainstreaming and respect for women’s rights. The 
recommendations made by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture regarding 
the treatment of detainees and convicts were not adequately addressed. Implementation of the 
legislation on hate speech and of the national action plan for the Istanbul Convention’s 
 
6 
 
provisions needs to be improved. The civilian external oversight mechanism over the police is 
still not fully functional and it lacks representatives from civil society organisations.  
North Macedonia has achieved some level of preparation/ is moderately prepared in the area 
of freedom of expression. Overall, it made limited progress during the reporting period to 
address the previous recommendations. The general context is favourable to media freedom 
and allows for critical media reporting, although there were some tensions during the 2021 
local elections. Action on self-regulation of the media should resume and produce practical 
results in advancing professional standards of journalism. Greater transparency is needed to 
regarding media advertising by state institutions and political parties. The authorities need to 
step up their efforts to reform the public service broadcaster, ensuring its independence, 
professional standards and financial sustainability. The reform process of the public service 
broadcaster, in line with its five-year development strategy, is constrained by delays in 
appointing members of its programming council. The council of the Agency for Audio and 
Audiovisual Media Services still needs to be appointed. The labour rights of journalists still 
need to be addressed. 
On regional cooperation, the country maintained good relations with other enlargement 
countries and continued its engagement in regional initiatives. Existing bilateral agreements, 
including the Prespa Agreement between North Macedonia and Greece as well as the Treaty 
of Friendship, Good Neighbourliness and Cooperation with Bulgaria, need to be implemented 
in good faith by all parties. 
On the economic criteria, North Macedonia has made some progress and has achieved a 
good level of preparation in developing a functioning market economy. In 2021, the economy 
largely recovered from the COVID-19 pandemic. The government continued to implement 
fiscal support measures to help the recovery. Helped by rebounding tax revenue, the fiscal 
deficit fell to 5.4 % of GDP in 2021, while debt levels stabilised after a rising significantly in 
2020. With the rise in food and energy prices accelerating in early 2022, the government 
adopted a new set of fiscal measures to contain the negative impact on the economy, though 
the fiscal measures could have been better targeted. The central bank tightened its policy 
stance in view of rising inflationary pressures. Important policy reforms to improve fiscal 
governance and the sustainability of public finances stalled. After long delays, the new 
organic budget law, which provides for fiscal rules and a fiscal council, was adopted by the 
Parliament in mid-September. The management of public investment needs further 
improvement. The banking sector remained sound. Regulatory measures to ease borrowing 
requirements were phased out in 2021. The business environment continues to be held back 
by the large size of the informal economy and by slow progress in streamlining para-fiscal 
charges. 
North Macedonia has made some progress and is moderately prepared to cope with 
competitive pressure and market forces within the EU. Integration with the EU in trade and 
investment remained at a high level in 2021, in spite of lockdowns and disruptions of supply 
chains domestically and in trade partner countries. The share of high-value products in 
exports increased further. There was further progress towards improving vocational 
educational training, but major skills shortages persist to meet labour market needs, entailing 
a long school-to-work transition. These issues, as well as large gaps in transport and energy 
infrastructure, low investment and innovation spending are holding back the country’s 
potential for growth. The digitalisation of the economy is advancing, but the competitiveness 
of domestic businesses could be improved through a wider offering of public e-services. 
As regards its ability to assume the obligations of membership, North Macedonia is 
moderately prepared in most of the areas covered by Cluster 2 on the internal market, 
 
7 
 
namely the free movement of goods, services and capital, intellectual property, competition 
policy, financial services and consumer and health protection. The country has achieved a 
good level of preparation on company law, although it is still at an early stage on freedom of 
movement for workers. In the reporting period, North Macedonia made good progress on free 
movement of capital and some progress on company law and financial services. No progress 
was made on competition policy. Overall, more progress is needed in the coming year in the 
areas covered by this cluster as it will feed into North Macedonia’s preparations to meet the 
requirements of the EU’s internal market. Work on this cluster is of highly relevant for the 
development of the Common Regional Market.  
Overall, North Macedonia is moderately prepared in most of the areas covered by Cluster 3 
on competitiveness and inclusive growth, including in digital transformation and media, 
taxation, enterprise and industrial policy, education and culture and economic and monetary 
policy. It has achieved a good level of preparation in science and research and in the customs 
union. Some progress was made in most of the areas covered by this cluster. Good progress 
was made in the area of economic and monetary policy, following the adoption of the Organic 
Budget Law in September 2022. More efforts are needed, however, particularly in areas 
where limited progress was made, such as digital transformation and media as well as 
education and culture.  
On Cluster 4 on the Green Agenda and sustainable connectivity, North Macedonia has 
achieved a good level of preparation in trans-European networks. The country is moderately 
prepared on transport policy and energy and has achieved some level of preparation on 
environment and climate change. Some progress was made in the areas of environment and 
climate change. Substantial efforts are needed in the areas where limited progress was made 
such as in energy, transport policy and trans-European networks. The country needs to 
accelerate the implementation of the Economic and Investment Plan and of the Green Agenda 
for the Western Balkans over the upcoming period. 
North Macedonia is moderately prepared in most areas of Cluster 5 on resources, 
agriculture and cohesion. It has achieved a good level of preparation in the area of food 
safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy and is at an early stage of preparation in financial 
and budgetary provisions. Over the reporting period, some progress was made in agriculture 
and rural development and in food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy. However, 
further efforts are needed, in particular in areas where limited or no progress was made, such 
as in fisheries, financial and budgetary provisions, and in regional policy and the coordination 
of structural instruments. 
Concerning Cluster 6 on external relations, North Macedonia is moderately prepared in the 
area of external relations and has reached a good level of preparation with regard to the 
common foreign and security policy. The country made limited progress during the reporting 
period on common commercial policy. North Macedonia has made very good progress by 
fully aligning with the EU common foreign and security policy, following Russia’s aggression 
against Ukraine. By doing so, North Macedonia has shown it can be a reliable partner.  
North Macedonia remains on one of the main transit routes for migration movement. The 
country continues to play a constructive role in the management of mixed migration flows. It 
cooperates effectively with neighbouring countries and EU Member States, including with 
guest officers from the EU Member States on the ground. Efforts to ensure basic living 
conditions and services for all migrants staying in the country continued. The registration of 
migrants and adequate protection-sensitive profiling remains a priority and needs to be carried 
out in a more systematic manner. In August 2022, the Commission negotiated a status 
agreement with North Macedonia that would allow the European Border and Coast Guard 
 
8 
 
Agency (Frontex) to deploy the European Border and Coast Guard standing corps to the 
country. The agreement is expected to be signed before the end of the year. The country 
should take a more systematic approach to fighting the smuggling of migrants. 
2. 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
2.1. 
FUNCTIONING OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 
REFORM 
2.1.1. Democracy 
The reporting period was characterised by intense efforts, which led to the start of the 
accession negotiation process. The holding of the first Intergovernmental Conference in July 
2022 was a historic moment and marked a new phase in the EU accession process for North 
Macedonia. This was a clear recognition of the determination of North Macedonia to 
implement EU related reforms. The country continued its efforts to improve democracy and 
the rule of law, despite some challenges.  
Elections  
Overall, the legal framework remains conducive to the organisation of democratic elections. 
However, limited progress has been made over the reporting period in addressing and 
implementing the outstanding recommendations made by the OSCE/ODIHR and the Venice 
Commission. As mentioned in previous reports, the electoral legislation should be 
comprehensively reviewed to address existing inconsistencies and the relevant laws need to 
be adopted in a timely, inclusive and transparent manner, well before the next elections. In 
this regard, the authorities need to step up their efforts and show political will to further 
improve the electoral process. 
Local elections took place on 17 and 31 October 2021. Overall, VMRO-DPMNE3 won 42 
mayoral posts (against five in 2017) and SDSM4 won 16 (against 57 in 2017). The ethnic 
Albanian parties broadly retained their positions won in 2017. Only two women were elected 
as mayors. Political parties should take further steps to encourage the participation of women 
in the electoral process. 
According to the final report by the OSCE/ODIHR, the elections were competitive and 
fundamental freedoms were widely respected. However, there are still numerous gaps and 
inconsistencies in the electoral legal framework. The frequent and often unaligned changes to 
the Electoral Code, which were adopted in a hasty manner and just prior to elections, are 
contrary to international good practices. Candidates could campaign freely, but negative 
rhetoric, frequently targeting women, was noted. While the voting procedures were generally 
respected, frequent issues were identified with the use of biometric identification devices. 
A comprehensive reform of electoral legislation, in line with all outstanding OSCE/ODIHR 
recommendations and following a broad consultative process, needs to be finally completed 
well in advance of the next elections. The accuracy of the voter register should be improved 
through systematic data updates. 
In both rounds of the local elections, the State Election Commission met most legal 
deadlines, despite the short timeframe to adapt to the amendments to the Electoral Code 
adopted in September 2021. The State Election Commission needs to be allocated the 
necessary resources in a timely manner to carry out its mandate efficiently and independently.  
                                                            
3 Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organisation – Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity 
4 Social Democratic Union of Macedonia