3 
 
1. INTRODUCTION1 
1.1 CONTEXT 
Since the opening of Serbia’s accession negotiations in January 2014, 22 out of 35 chapters 
have been opened. All chapters in cluster 1 on the fundamentals and all chapters in cluster 4 on 
the Green agenda and sustainable connectivity have been opened. Two chapters have 
provisionally been closed. In June 2021, Serbia accepted the revised enlargement methodology. 
The overall pace of negotiations will continue to depend on the rule of law reforms and the 
normalisation of Serbia’s relations with Kosovo*. The Commission’s recommendations from 
previous years, that Serbia has fulfilled the opening benchmarks for cluster 3 (competitiveness 
and inclusive growth) and that this cluster is technically ready for opening, remain valid. 
The Serbian government has continued to declare EU membership its strategic goal. However, 
the early election and the corresponding break in the functioning of Government and Parliament 
has slowed down the progress of reforms. Strong political will, effective policy planning and 
coordination, along with sufficient human and financial resources for EU accession across all 
institutions involved are needed, so that Serbia can speed up the work towards meeting its 
objectives for EU accession negotiations. The Serbian authorities still need, as a matter of 
priority, to take much more responsibility for proactive and objective communication on Serbia’s 
EU accession process and the EU, which is by far Serbia’s main political and economic partner, 
and for countering disinformation in its national media. 
Serbia has continued to broadly implement the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) 
between Serbia and the EU. Serbia needs to continue aligning its legislation to reach full 
compliance with the SAA. 
In the reporting period, the EU-facilitated Dialogue on normalisation of relations between Serbia 
and Kosovo continued. Both Parties committed to fully implement all of their respective 
obligations stemming from the Agreement on the Path to Normalisation and its Implementation 
Annex reached in 2023. Constructive engagement in the normalisation of their relations is also 
a requirement under the Reform and Growth Facility for the Western Balkans. The EU expects 
Serbia to fully cooperate and take all the necessary measures to apprehend and swiftly bring to 
justice the perpetrators of the 2023 attacks in the north of Kosovo.  
Following Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, Serbia aligned with some EU positions in 
international forums (including in the UN General Assembly). Serbia has continued to cooperate 
with the EU on sanctions circumvention and providing financial and humanitarian support to 
Ukraine. However, it still does not to align with any restrictive measures against the Russian 
Federation and has not aligned with most of the High Representative statements on this matter. 
It has maintained high-level relations with the Russian Federation and intensified its relations 
with China, raising questions about Serbia’s strategic direction. Under the EU-Serbia negotiating 
framework, Serbia is expected to progressively align its policies towards third countries with the 
policies and positions adopted by the EU, including restrictive measure. 
 
* This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is line with UNSCR 1244/1999 and the ICJ Opinion 
on the Kosovo declaration of independence. 
1  is presented in a renewed format and structure. Main findings of the report, together with the 
recommendations (previously grey assessment boxes) are brought together at the beginning of the report. 
Furthermore, under the fundamentals cluster, for better readability and comparability across all reports, certain data 
is provided (also) in the form of graphs. 
 
4 
 
Serbia has actively engaged in the implementation of the new Growth Plan for the Western 
Balkans across the four pillars on (i) the gradual integration with the EU single market, (ii) 
regional economic integration, (iii) fundamental reforms and (iv) increased financial support. 
Significant efforts have been made on gradual integration. On 3 October 2024, Serbia adopted 
its Reform Agenda envisaged under the Reform and Growth Facility2 (Growth Plan for Western 
Balkans). The Reform Agenda covers reform milestones in (i) business environment and private 
sector development; (ii) green and digital transition; (iii) human capital; (iv) fundamental rights 
and the rule of law. The Commission’s 2024 rule of law report3 covered Serbia for the first time.  
 
1.2. MAIN FINDINGS OF THE REPORTS4 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
Democracy 
The conduct of elections requires tangible improvement and further reform. It is vital that all 
outstanding and recent recommendations by the OSCE/ODIHR and the Council of Europe 
bodies are fully implemented, in a transparent and inclusive process and well ahead of any new 
elections. 
Parliament’s ability to ensure the exercise of necessary checks and balances is constrained by 
issues of effectiveness, autonomy, and transparency, including in terms of the oversight of the 
executive and the law-making process. Parliament’s new composition is more pluralistic than 
the previous legislature. Debates continued to be marked by tensions between the ruling 
coalition and the opposition. Parliamentary rules of procedure need to be revised, and the Code 
of Conduct to penalise offences by parliamentarians should be applied. 
The institutions in charge of the EU integration process are in place and work efficiently. 
However, the legislative recess that was linked to the calling of an early election led to a slow-
down of the reform process and posed a challenge to the functioning of administrative 
structures responsible for the accession negotiations. Serbia continues to declare EU 
membership as its strategic goal. However, the authorities are yet to ensure a more proactive 
and objective communication about the EU and Serbia’s accession process. 
The government was in a caretaker capacity between 1 November 2023 and 2 May 2024, when 
the new government was appointed. The recommendations by independent bodies need to be 
followed up more closely. Implementation of the programme to reform the local government 
system continued to make slow progress. 
Civil society organisations (CSOs) in Serbia operate in a difficult environment. Further efforts 
are needed to ensure systematic, genuine and meaningful cooperation between the government 
 
2 OJ L, 2024/1449, 24.5.2024. 
3 COM(2024)800 final 
4 This report covers the period from 15 June 2023 to 1 September 2024. It is based on input from a variety of 
sources, including contributions from the government of Serbia, EU Member States, European Parliament reports and 
information from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also includes the results of 
comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of law. 
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of preparation, 
moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made during the reporting 
period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, good progress and very 
good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been used. 
 
5 
 
and CSOs. Verbal attacks and smear campaigns against some CSOs continued, including by 
high-level officials. The transparency of public funding to civil society needs to be significantly 
improved. 
Public administration reform 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of public administration reform and overall, no 
progress was made.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ reduce the excessive number of acting positions and allocate sufficient resources for 
effective, merit-based recruitment processes; 
→ strengthen the mechanism for systematically integrating the opinion of the Public Policy 
Secretariat into draft laws and policy documents, in line with the Law on the planning 
system; 
→ put in place a unified, comprehensive and transparent system for capital investment 
planning and management. 
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights 
Serbia has reached some level of preparation and has made limited progress. 
Functioning of the judiciary 
Serbia is between having some level of preparation and a moderate level of preparation in the 
area of judiciary. Limited progress was made, notably in the adoption of by-laws to the laws 
implementing the constitutional amendments. Adoption of the Law on Judicial Academy is still 
pending, whilst the Government has decided not to amend the Law on Seats and Territorial 
Jurisdiction of Courts.  Several judges and prosecutors were elected in 2023 and 2024 whereas 
a considerable number of vacancies remain to be filled. The current system of recruitment, 
transfer and promotion of judges and prosecutors has not been comprehensively revised to 
ensure that careers are fully based on merit. Undue pressure on the judiciary remains a concern. 
Four vacant positions at the Constitutional Court still need to be filled. Serbia is yet to show a 
genuine commitment to investigating and adjudicating war crimes cases. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ adopt the Law on Judicial Academy, and carry out the necessary appointments of judges 
and prosecutors in line with the legal framework to reduce the number of vacancies; 
→ ensure that the High Judicial Council and the High Prosecutorial Council, the Government 
and the Parliament effectively and proactively defend judicial independence and 
prosecutorial autonomy in cases of undue influence, including undue comments made 
publicly by members of Government or Parliament on ongoing investigations or court 
proceedings which breach their codes of conduct; 
→ operationalise the uniform and centralised case management systems; improve the 
efficiency of the justice system, in particular reduce the backlogs and disposition times for 
 
6 
 
the Administrative and Constitutional Courts and fully implement the human resources 
strategy. 
Fight against corruption 
Serbia is between having some level of preparation and a moderate level of preparation in the 
fight against corruption. Overall, some progress has been made during the reporting period on 
last year’s recommendations. Serbia adopted the new anti-corruption strategy (2024-2028) in 
July 2024. Serbia still needs to adopt and begin implementing the accompanying action plan.  
On the recommendations by the Group of States against Corruption (GRECO), Serbia reported, in 
December 2023, on the recommendations of the fifth evaluation round. GRECO has assessed 
that of the 24 recommendations, one recommendation has been fully met, and 10 have been 
partially met. The number of final convictions for high-level corruption cases, of new 
investigations as well as the number of new indictments has increased, yet obstacles remain 
for establishing a robust track record. Serbia joined the regional project on trial monitoring of 
organised crime and corruption cases. Overall, corruption is prevalent in many areas and 
remains an issue of concern. There is a need for strong political will to effectively address 
corruption issues, as well as a robust criminal justice response to high-level corruption. 
Targeted risk assessments and specific measures are also needed to address corruption in the 
most vulnerable sectors.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ further improve its track record on investigations, prosecutions and final court decisions in 
high-level corruption cases, in particular the seizure and confiscation of criminal assets; 
→ address all GRECO recommendations, in particular from the fifth evaluation round; 
→ adopt and implement the anti-corruption action plan accompanying the new anti-corruption 
strategy and establish an effective monitoring and coordination mechanism to track 
progress, while focusing on all relevant interim benchmarks and GRECO recommendations. 
Fundamental rights 
Serbia’s legislative and institutional framework for upholding fundamental rights is broadly in 
place. This framework needs to be consistently and efficiently implemented. Most of the 
Commission’s recommendations from last year have not yet been implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ strengthen human rights institutions by allocating the necessary financial and human 
resources, ensuring they exercise their mandates to the full, and by putting in place 
procedures to ensure compliance with measures, including interim measures of the 
European Court of Human Rights; 
→ adopt and allocate appropriate financial and human resources for the pending action plans 
on violence against women, deinstitutionalisation, anti-discrimination – including the rights 
of LGBTIQ persons – and violence against children, and ensure timely reporting on their 
implementation; actively counter hate crimes and establish a track record of investigations 
and convictions; 
→ demonstrate, through better data collection, real improvements in the effective exercise of 
the rights of individuals belonging to national minorities, including reference to the targets 
 
7 
 
set by the Poznan Declaration on Roma5 inclusion and by the future action plan on national 
minorities. 
Freedom of expression 
Serbia has some level of preparation and has made no progress on the recommendations from 
last year, which therefore remain valid.  
In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ implement the new media laws, respecting their letter and spirit, including on the 
independence of the regulatory body for electronic media (REM), election of the new REM 
Council members and amendment of the laws to address the remaining issues in aligning 
with European standards and the latest EU acquis; 
→ strengthen the protection and safety of journalists, notably by ensuring that: (i) high-level 
officials refrain from labelling or making verbal attacks on journalists; and (ii) any threats 
and cases of physical and verbal violence are swiftly followed up, and as appropriate, 
publicly condemned, investigated or prosecuted; 
→ ensure transparent and equitable co-funding for media content serving the public interest, 
and full transparency in media ownership and advertising. 
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security 
Serbia is between having some level of preparation and a moderate level of preparation and 
has made some progress. Serbia continued to significantly contribute to the management of 
mixed migration flows towards the EU by playing an active and constructive role and 
cooperating effectively with its neighbours and EU Member States. Part of last year’s 
recommendations have been implemented. The new Frontex Status Agreement was signed in 
June 2024. In March 2024, Serbia adopted the 2024-2027 Programme for the fight against 
human trafficking and 2024-2026 action plan and appointed a new National Coordinator in 
September 2023. Serbia visa policy is not yet fully aligned with EU visa policy. Serbia still has a 
visa-free regime with 16 countries that are on the EU list of visa-required countries. However, 
Serbia’s reform agenda committed the country to withdraw visa-free arrangements with at least 
three countries by December 2024. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ amend the Law on internal affairs to make the police fully autonomous from the Ministry of 
Interior and fully accountable only to the Prosecutor’s Office during pre-investigation and 
investigation phases; 
→ further align with the EU visa policy; take measures to systematically register and identify 
migrants, develop swift asylum procedures and increase capacities for managing effective 
return operations; 
→ implement the programme for fight against human trafficking, increase national 
coordination efforts and strengthen the protection of and support to victims. 
Fight against organised crime  
 
5 In line with the terminology of European institutions, the umbrella term ‘Roma’ is used here to refer to a number of 
different groups, without denying the particular features of these groups. 
 
8 
 
Serbia has some level of preparation and has made limited progress in addressing last year’s 
recommendations. Authorities continued to cooperate actively with CEPOL, Eurojust, Europol 
and INTERPOL, notably in drugs trafficking and the fight against organised crime groups. There 
has been insufficient follow-up in investigations and prosecutions for the 2023 attacks in the 
north of Kosovo. 
Most of last year’s recommendations have not yet been implemented and remain valid. In the 
coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ increase efficiency in prosecuting serious and organised crime cases, including money 
laundering cases and the seizure and confiscation of criminal assets by the systematic 
tracking of money flows, the effective use of financial investigations and special 
investigative measures, and the systemic use of extended confiscation; 
→ amend the Criminal Code to effectively criminalise the trafficking of weapons; adopt the 
new Law on weapons and ammunition; step up the fight against the storage, sale and 
ownership of illegal firearms; 
→ take specific steps to ensure a clear separation between mandates and regulations on the 
interception of communications for criminal investigation on the one hand, and for security 
purposes on the other. 
 
ECONOMIC CRITERIA 
The existence of a functioning market economy 
Serbia has a good level of preparation and has made some progress in developing a 
functioning market economy. An appropriately tight monetary and fiscal policy has helped 
disinflation, while economic growth is on a recovery path. The reform of the public sector wage 
system continued to advance slowly. There are still structural challenges in State aid, 
competition, and public procurement; and state-owned enterprises (SOEs) have a significant 
presence in the economy. The private sector is hampered by weaknesses in the rule of law, in 
particular in tackling corruption and judicial inefficiency. Last year’s recommendations were 
implemented to some extent but are still mostly valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in 
particular: 
→ keep an appropriate tight policy stance to help disinflation, strictly comply with the new 
fiscal rules and strengthen medium-term budgeting; 
→ continue the preparatory steps for an appropriately designed reform of the public sector 
wage system;  
→ adopt the necessary implementing legislation to fully implement the new SOE law and 
strengthen SOE governance to reduce the associated fiscal risks. 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the EU 
Serbia is moderately prepared and has made some progress in coping with competitive 
pressures and market forces within the EU. The structure of the economy is favourable, with a 
growing manufacturing and service sector that benefits from sizeable FDI and close economic 
integration with the EU. However, the quality and relevance of education and training does not 
 
9 
 
fully meet labour market needs. Public investment has remained high, which underscores the 
need to improve public investment management. SMEs still face a number of obstacles, 
including an uneven playing field with large companies and foreign investors. The green 
transition needs to quickly pick up speed to support the competitive position of Serbian 
companies in global value chains and to continue to attract investors. Last year’s 
recommendations have been partially implemented and remain partially valid. In the coming 
year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ reduce the skills mismatch on the labour market, including by stepping up vocational 
education and training and lifelong learning; 
→ adopt an improved legal framework for public investment management that sets out a 
unified, comprehensive and transparent mechanism for prioritising all public investments 
regardless of the type and source of financing;  
→ advance on the green energy transition, in particular, through decarbonising the industry, 
especially in the energy sector, increase investments in renewables and energy efficiency, 
and decrease energy dependence on Russia. 
Chapter 5: Public procurement 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of public procurement. Limited progress was made 
through amendments to the Law on public procurement to further align with the EU acquis and 
with related improvements to the public procurement portal. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ further align its legislation with the 2014 EU Directives on public procurement, in particular 
by adopting amendments to the Law on public-private partnerships and concessions and by 
ensuring that projects are subject to public procurement procedures; 
→ ensure that procurement rules under intergovernmental agreements concluded with third 
countries comply with the public procurement principles, in line with the EU acquis; 
→ further strengthen the capacity of the Public Procurement Office, the Commission for 
Public-Private Partnerships and Concessions, the Republic Commission for the Protection of 
Rights in Public Procedures and the Administrative Court. 
Chapter 18: Statistics 
Serbia is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of statistics. Good 
progress was made during the reporting period with the agricultural census conducted in 
October 2023, in line with EU standards. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were mostly implemented. In the coming 
year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ adopt a new statistical law to increase the statistical office’s professional independence; 
→ continue to improve the compilation of macroeconomic statistics in line with the European 
System of Accounts (ESA 2010) notably by removing confidentiality flags preventing 
publication of the data. 
 
10 
 
Chapter 32: Financial control 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of financial control. No progress was made in the 
reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ ensure full consistency of the public internal financial control (PIFC) legal basis with the 
general legal framework;  
→ create an effective internal audit function in all central budget institutions;  
→ adopt a managerial accountability roadmap and ensure its effective implementation. 
 
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET 
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of free movement of goods. Limited progress was 
made on last year’s recommendations with the adoption of strategic documents relevant to 
ensure compliance, alignment with and implementation of EU acquis in this chapter, which 
remain to be assessed by the Commission. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year and remain partially valid. In the coming 
year Serbia should: 
→ start implementing strategic documents meant to ensure compliance with Articles 34-36 of 
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) and  all the EU acquis in this 
chapter, following the assessment of the Commission; 
→ align with the latest EU acquis on market surveillance; 
→ align with the EU acquis on general product safety. 
Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the freedom of movement for workers. Serbia made limited 
progress by amending the legislation on the employment of foreigners and by carrying out 
preparations to join the European Network of Employment Services (EURES). 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ step up cooperation with EU Member States on the coordination of social security systems; 
→ start preparations to join the European Labour Authority. 
Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services 
Serbia is moderately prepared in these areas. No progress was made on the Commission’s 
recommendations from last year, which remain valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in 
particular: 
 
11 
 
→ adopt the horizontal Law on services, complete the alignment of sectoral laws with the 
horizontal law and the EU acquis, and set up a point of single contact via a portal with 
online information for service providers, including on all relevant administrative 
procedures;  
→ finalise alignment with the EU postal acquis and ensure compliance with the new postal 
market rules;  
→ continue aligning with the EU acquis on the mutual recognition of professional 
qualifications, including on the directives on the recognition of professional qualifications 
and on a proportionality test. 
Chapter 4: Free movement of capital 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the free movement of capital. Limited progress was made 
during the reporting period, in particular following the adoption of the amended Law on 
Payment Services which aims to align with the Payment Services Directive (PSD 2). 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
remain valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ liberalise capital movements in line with its obligations under the Stabilisation and 
Association Agreement (SAA), in particular by removing the remaining restrictions on the 
acquisition of agricultural land by EU nationals and by adopting amendments to the Law 
on the elements of property law relations to ensure equal treatment on the acquisition of 
property rights;  
→ demonstrate, by building a track record, increased effectiveness in monitoring, 
supervision, financial intelligence, investigation and reporting. 
Chapter 6: Company law 
Serbia has a good level of preparation in company law. No progress was made during the 
reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ further align national legislation with the EU acquis on company law, particularly on takeover 
bids;  
→ align national legislation with the EU acquis on cross-border conversions, mergers and 
divisions and on the use of digital tools and processes in company law; 
→ further align national legislation on company reporting and transparency. 
Chapter 7: Intellectual property law 
Serbia has a good level of preparation in intellectual property rights (IPR). Limited progress was 
made with slightly improved statistics on enforcement. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
 
12 
 
→ align the copyright and related rights legislation with the EU directives on collective rights 
management, on orphan works and on certain permitted uses of certain works and other 
subject matter protected by copyright and related rights for the benefit of persons who are 
blind, visually impaired or otherwise print-disabled;  
→ strengthen enforcement by improving capacities to handle IPR cases and improving 
coordination among different stakeholders. 
→ leverage collaboration with the European Union Intellectual Property Office taking advantage 
of agency’s expertise, networks, and specialised databases. 
Chapter 8: Competition policy 
Serbia is moderately prepared in competition policy. No progress was made. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ align the existing fiscal State aid schemes and work on aligning the Law on multilateral 
interchange fees and special operating rules for card-based payment transactions with the 
EU acquis and SAA obligations; 
→ ensure that the notification and standstill obligations are systematically respected for all 
State aid measures and build a solid track record in implementing the laws on protection 
of competition and State aid control; 
→ finalise the inventory of State aid schemes and draw up an action plan to align all existing 
schemes identified as being incompatible with SAA obligations. 
Chapter 9: Financial services 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of financial services. Limited progress was made 
during the reporting period. Further efforts should be made to align legislation with the financial 
services acquis, focusing on the identified priorities. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year remain largely valid. In the coming year, 
Serbia should in particular: 
→ continue to align the banking regulation with the revised versions of the Capital 
Requirements Regulation, the Capital Requirements Directive (CRR/CRD) and the Bank 
Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD);  
→ continue to align with the EU acquis in insurance including Solvency II Directive; 
→ continue to align with the EU acquis on capital markets, including the European Markets in 
Financial Instruments Regulation (MiFIR), the Directive on alternative investment fund 
managers (AIFMD) and the Directive relating to undertakings for collective investment in 
transferable securities (UCITS). 
Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection 
Serbia is moderately prepared in consumer and health protection. Limited progress was made 
in implementing consumer protection legislation and the alternative dispute resolution. 
 
13 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
remain valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ introduce an effective risk-based approach for official import controls to address the 
increased frequency, duration, volume and cost of sanitary inspections; 
→ further align its legislation with the EU acquis on consumer protection, substances of human 
origin, patients’ rights in cross-border healthcare, tobacco control, and medicines for human 
and veterinary use; 
→ amend the Law on health records and documentation to ensure that it fully complies with 
EU data protection rules and the EU acquis. 
 
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH 
Chapter 10: Digital transformation and media 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the field of digital transformation and media. Limited progress 
was made on further digitalisation in the area of e-government and in aligning with EU Digital 
Single Market objectives. The deployment of ultra-fast broadband infrastructure in rural areas 
and support to the digitalisation of schools continued. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
remain largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should: 
→ further align its electronic communications and cybersecurity legislation with the EU 
regulatory framework, including the Gigabit Infrastructure Act, the European Electronic 
Communications Code, and the NIS2 Directive; 
→ ensure full financial and operational independence of the regulator for electronic media 
(REM) and the regulator for electronic communication and postal services (RATEL) in line 
with the EU acquis, including the EU Electronic Communications Code, and the provisions 
set out in the Law on electronic media; 
→ amend the 2023 media laws and the law on public broadcasting to address the remaining 
issues in aligning with the Audiovisual Media Services Directive and European standards, 
including recent changes to the latest EU acquis, and ensure their full implementation, 
including compliance with the provisions on electing a new REM Council. 
Chapter 16: Taxation 
Serbia is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of taxation and made 
limited progress, in particular in further digitalising indirect and direct taxation and 
implementing the Tax Administration transformation programme. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ continue implementing the Tax Administration transformation programme, in particular 
procuring and starting implementation of an integrated information system to support the 
Tax Administration’s new business model, and hire additional staff;  
 
14 
 
→ further align legislation with the EU acquis in the areas of VAT, excise duties and direct 
taxation; 
→ start preparations towards achieving interconnection and interoperability with the common 
EU taxation IT systems.  
Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy 
Serbia is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in economic and monetary 
policy. Some progress was made with the introduction of expenditure ceilings and the adoption 
of an action plan to strengthen the medium-term expenditure framework. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ further align the legislation on the National Bank of Serbia (NBS) with the EU acquis to 
ensure its full independence; 
→ further align the budget system law with Directive 85/2011 in the field of macroeconomic 
and fiscal projections, a 3-year expenditure perspective and transparency, including for 
capital transfers and guarantees to SOEs, and accounting and statistical reporting. 
Chapter 19: Social policy and employment 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of social policy and employment. Serbia made limited 
progress, particularly by adopting an implementation plan for the Youth Guarantee covering 
2023-2026 and launching the Youth Guarantee pilot in January 2024. 
The Commission’s recommendations were partially met and remain valid. In the coming period, 
Serbia should in particular: 
→ conduct a functional review of active labour market policies and the workload of national 
employment service advisers to ensure adequate financial and institutional resources for 
employment and social policies and target more systematically young people, women and 
long-term unemployed people, and continue implementing the Youth Guarantee pilot; 
→ launch consultations on the new labour law, including provisions on foreign seconded 
workers in line with the EU acquis, and avoid further delays in implementing the action plan 
for Chapter 19; 
→ improve the coverage and adequacy of social benefits for people below the poverty 
threshold, including financial social assistance and child allowances, address the high 
caseload of social welfare centres, and remove the administrative burden when applying for 
social assistance, in particular for the Roma population. 
Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy 
Serbia is moderately prepared in enterprise and industrial policy and made some progress, in 
particular with the adoption of a new law on the governance of state-owned enterprises 
(SOEs), a new SME development strategy and new action plans to implement the Industrial 
Strategy and the SOE strategy. 
 
15 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ further improve the predictability of the business environment, in particular by 
substantially increasing the proportion of legislative acts opened for public consultation; 
→ adopt outstanding implementing legislation to ensure proper implementation of the new 
SOE law; 
→ further increase resources for financial and technical support to SMEs. 
Chapter 25: Science and research 
Serbia has a good level of preparation in science and research. Some progress was made, in 
particular with the adoption of the new action plans for the smart specialisation strategy and 
the strategy for the development of a start-up ecosystem.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ increase its national funding for research and innovation;  
→ align its legislation with the European Research Infrastructure Consortium Regulation;  
→ follow up the actions relating to the new European Research Area. 
Chapter 26: Education and culture 
Serbia has a good level of preparation in education and culture. Limited progress was made, in 
particular by further consolidating the national qualifications framework (NQF) system and 
taking further steps to ensure compliance of the quality assurance system in higher education 
with the recommendations of the European Association for Quality Assurance in Higher 
Education (ENQA), and by adopting a new action plan for the education strategy. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ increase the number of children participating in early childhood education and care, in 
particular those from disadvantaged backgrounds; 
→ continue with the operationalisation of the NQF system, focusing more on the quality and 
scope of non-formal education and higher education; 
→ ensure that the policy and institutional framework for quality assurance in higher education 
fully complies with the ENQA recommendations. 
Chapter 29: Customs union 
Serbia has a good level of preparation in the area of the customs union. Some progress was 
made with the adoption of amendments to the existing legislation, which aimed to further align 
it with the EU acquis and implement the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products. 
Serbia is party of the Common Transit Convention and has successfully launched the New 
Computerised Transit System (NCTS – phase 5). 
 
16 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partly implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ further upgrade the customs processing system by integrating risk management;  
→ further develop the national customs IT system to enable interconnection and 
interoperability with the EU electronic customs environment. 
 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY 
This cluster covers four chapters: 14 (Transport policy), 15 (Energy), 21 (Trans-European 
networks) and 27 (Environment and climate change). 
Chapter 14: Transport 
Serbia has a good level of preparation in this field. Limited progress was made during the 
reporting period with the adoption of the Road Safety Strategy and its 3-year action plan.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
remain largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia, should in particular: 
→ adopt the national transport strategy; improve the maintenance system for road and rail 
infrastructure; align and simplify road and rail border crossing procedures, including the 
extension of green corridors/green lanes for crossings with neighbouring EU Member States; 
and implement measures in the action plan for the national road safety strategy; 
→ ensure that procurement procedures for projects follow the principles of transparency, equal 
treatment and open competition.  
→ on rail reform, continue aligning legislation with the fourth railway package and adopt the 
Law on railway safety. 
Chapter 15: Energy 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of energy. Limited progress was made on last year’s 
recommendations. Progress included the completion of works on the gas interconnector 
between Serbia and Bulgaria and the establishment of the Republic Commission for Energy 
Networks. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ align with and implement the Electricity Integration Package and determining net 
transmission capacities and allocating capacity on all cross-border interconnections in the 
context of establishing an integrated electricity market. 
→ finalise the unbundling of the gas system operators, certify Serbian transmission system 
operators (TSOs), and provide effective, non-discriminatory and transparent third-party 
access at all gas entry points; certify the underground gas storage (UGS) Banatski Dvor in 
line with the Gas Storage Regulation; 
 
17 
 
→ finalise and adopt implementing legislation in the area of  energy performance of buildings; 
adopt the Just Transition Action Plan. 
Chapter 21: Trans-European networks 
Serbia is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of trans-European 
networks. Overall, some progress was made, including starting construction of the Niš–
Dimitrovgrad railway line and completing the construction of the gas interconnector with 
Bulgaria. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ continue to improve its transport and energy infrastructure connections, ensuring quality and 
transparency in line with EU standards; 
→ finalise the permitting process for the Serbia-Bulgaria gas interconnector and put it into 
operation; start construction of section III of the Trans-Balkan electricity corridor and 
continue project preparation for section IV between Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and 
Montenegro; 
→ conclude the project preparations and launch the procurement process for the works to 
modernise the railway sections on Corridor X from Belgrade to Niš. 
Chapter 27: Environment and climate change 
Serbia has some level of preparation in the area of environment and climate change. Good 
progress was made, namely on waste management legislation, integrated permits for industrial 
pollution control, the adoption of the Climate Change Adaptation Program and the National 
Energy and Climate Plan (NECP). 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid, in particular as concerns the priority reforms needed. In the coming year, Serbia 
should in particular: 
→ implement measures set out in: (i) the action plan for administrative capacity development; 
(ii) the low carbon development plan; and (iii) the programme on air protection; improve the 
institutional set up and ensure coordination within the government; 
→ adopt legislation in line the EU acquis on Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), Strategic 
Environmental Assessment (SEA) and the Environmental Crime Directive; ensure that all 
infrastructure investments comply with the EU environmental and climate acquis and 
national and international nature and water obligations, and ensure public participation; 
→ implement commitments under the Energy Community’s Decarbonisation Roadmap, 
particually in regards to the monitoring, reporting, verification and accreditation (MRVA) with 
a view to introducing carbon pricing and aligning with the EU emission trading scheme 
(ETS). 
 
 
 
18 
 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION 
Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development 
Serbia has some level of preparation in agriculture and rural development. Limited progress 
was made in strengthening the IPARD Agency’s capacity and improving overall efficiency in the 
implementation of the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance for Rural Development (IPARD). 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ take measures to improve the implementation and avoid further losses of IPARD funds, 
notably by increasing capacity building; ensure the smooth rollover of entrusted IPARD 
measures to the 2021-2027 period; and prepare new measures for entrustment; 
→ update and speed up implementation of the action plan for EU acquis alignment in 
agriculture and rural development and adopt legislation relevant to the common market 
organisation, on organics and on quality policy; 
→ adopt a national strategy for agriculture and rural development. 
Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy. No 
progress was made during the reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ adopt framework legislation on food safety, official controls, animal welfare and genetically 
modified organisms, aligned with the EU acquis; strengthen administrative capacity to 
ensure correct implementation. 
→ adopt and start implementation of the national plan to align legislation with EU quality 
standards for raw milk. 
→ prioritise the process of upgrading food establishments to be in line with the EU acquis. 
Chapter 13: Fisheries and aquaculture 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of fisheries and aquaculture. No progress was made 
during the reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Serbia should: 
→ adopt an action plan to ensure full alignment with the EU acquis by the date of accession, in 
particular on the organisation of markets, aquaculture, data collection, control measures, 
and illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing; 
→ address the severe understaffing of the authorities responsible for developing policy and 
anti-fraud controls for fisheries (including border controls). 
Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments 
 
19 
 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of regional policy and the coordination of structural 
instruments. Some progress was made on last year’s recommendations, in particular by 
implementing parts of the action plan on cohesion policy, such as the adoption of operational 
programmes and a tool for monitoring the fulfilment of enabling conditions. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ adopt and implement a comprehensive retention policy and address understaffing in critical 
institutions managing EU funds; 
→ keep improving capacity for the indirect management of IPA programmes, in particular to 
avoid late contracting and prepare for the ex post control of operational programmes; 
→ further elaborate the national development plan; further strengthen the institutional 
framework for cohesion policy; start working towards fiscal decentralisation and a more 
balanced regional development; and build a resilient ecosystem involving all levels of 
government and relevant non-state bodies, in line with the partnership principle. 
Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions 
Serbia has some level of preparation in the area of financial and budgetary provisions. No 
progress was made in implementing last year’s recommendations. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Serbia should in particular:  
develop organisational and procedural links between the institutions involved in the own 
resources system;  
continue preparations to meet the specific administrative conditions for own resources as laid 
down in the own resources regulations, including by drafting an action plan with a  timeline to 
meet the administrative conditions. 
 
CLUSTER 6: EXTERNAL RELATIONS 
Chapter 30: External relations 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of external relations. No progress was made. The 
capacity to tackle key challenges in trade policy needs to be strengthened, in particular to move 
forward with accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) where again no progress was 
made. Following the expiry of the previous set of trade restrictions in October 2023, Serbia 
introduced a number of new de facto and de iure trade barriers. This includes a new quantitative 
import restrictions on sunflower oil and margarine and an import ban on pellets in non-
compliance of the SAA.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain mostly 
valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ urgently remove remaining unjustified trade restrictions and refrain from introducing new 
ones; 
 
20 
 
→ adopt a WTO-compliant law on genetically modified organisms to move forward with 
remaining bilateral market access negotiations and finalise its accession to the WTO;  
→ continue to implement actions set out in the Common Regional Market action plan for 2021-
2024, take the necessary steps to implement CEFTA Additional Protocol 7 on dispute 
settlement and implement actions under the new action plan 2025-2028. 
Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of common foreign, security and defence policy. No 
progress was made overall during the reporting period as Serbia’s alignment pattern was largely 
unchanged, and some of its actions and statements went against EU foreign policy positions. 
Serbia maintained high-level relations with the Russian Federation, raising questions about 
Serbia’s strategic direction. The country also intensified relations with China. This included the 
entry into force on 1 July 2024 of the Free Trade Agreement with China, which is a strategic 
concern. Serbia continued cooperating with the EU on sanctions circumvention and continued 
providing support to Ukraine. Serbia continued to participate in and contribute substantially to 
EU crisis management missions and operations under the common security and defence policy. 
The recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain valid. In the coming 
year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ improve, as a matter of priority, its alignment with EU common foreign and security policy 
(CFSP), including restrictive measures, and avoid actions and statements that go against EU 
foreign policy positions; 
→ continue to step up action to prevent any attempt to use the territory of Serbia or legal 
bodies registered in Serbia to circumvent EU restrictive measures; 
→ make credible efforts to close space for foreign interference and information manipulation, 
including disinformation, and take action to build societal resilience against it and other 
forms of hybrid threats. 
 
1.3. STATE OF PLAY OF THE ACCESSION NEGOTIATIONS 
Clusters 
Chapters/areas  
State of play  
Fundamentals 
 
All chapters open 
23 – Judiciary and fundamental 
rights 
24 – Justice, freedom and security 
5 – Public procurement 
18 – Statistics 
32 – Financial control 
…Economic criteria 
…Functioning of democratic 
institutions 
…Public administration reform 
Opened July 2016 
Opened July 2016 
Opened December 2016 
Opened December 2018 
Opened December 2015 
 
 
 
Internal Market 
 
4 chapters open 
1 – Free movement of goods 
2 – Freedom of movement for 
workers 
Serbia 
working 
on 
fulfilment 
of 
opening 
benchmarks 
Draft EU Common Position in Council