1.1  
CONTEXT  
Since the opening of Serbia’s accession negotiations in January 2014, 22 out of 35 chapters 
have been opened, including all chapters in cluster 1 on the fundamentals and all chapters in 
cluster 4 on the Green agenda and sustainable connectivity. Two chapters have been 
provisionally closed. In June 2021, Serbia accepted the revised enlargement methodology. 
The overall pace of negotiations will continue to depend in particular on the pace of rule of 
law reforms and on the normalisation of Serbia’s relations with Kosovo*.  
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) between Serbia and the EU entered into 
force in September 2013. Serbia continued to implement the SAA, although a number of 
compliance issues remain.  
The Serbian government has continued to declare EU membership its strategic goal, but 
actions need to follow. Serbia’s reform progress allowed for the opening of negotiations under 
cluster 4 at the intergovernmental conference with Serbia on 14 December 2021. However, 
after the calling of the early parliamentary elections and the dissolution of Parliament in 
February 2022 the pace of reforms slowed down. Due to delays in the finalisation of election 
results, the government has acted in a caretaker capacity with limited powers since February 
2022.   
The EU-facilitated dialogue on the normalisation of relations between Serbia and Kosovo 
continued with meetings at leaders’ and chief negotiators’ level.  
The Commission’s recommendation from last year that Serbia has fulfilled the opening 
benchmarks for cluster 3 (competitiveness and inclusive growth) and that this cluster is 
technically ready for opening, remains valid.  
Following Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified aggression against Ukraine, Serbia aligned 
with most of the international community, including the EU, in voting for two relevant UN 
General Assembly (UNGA) resolutions and voted on Russia’s suspension from the Human 
Rights Council. However, Serbia did not align with any of the EU’s restrictive measures and 
most declarations by the High Representative (HR) on behalf of the EU against the Russian 
Federation. It maintained its close relationship with Russia, raising questions about Serbia’s 
strategic direction. Under the EU-Serbia Negotiating Framework, Serbia is expected to 
progressively align its policies towards third countries with the policies and positions adopted 
by the EU, including restrictive measures.  
It remains important that effective policy planning and coordination is in place, along with 
sufficient human and financial resources for EU accession across all institutions involved, so 
that Serbia can work towards meeting its objectives for EU accession negotiations. In line 
with the EU accession objective, the Serbian authorities need to, as a matter of priority, take 
responsibility for proactive and objective communication on the EU, which is by far Serbia’s 
main political and economic partner.  
The COVID-19 pandemic continued throughout the reporting period, following similar 
patterns across the region.  
                                                            
 
* This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is line with UNSCR 1244/1999 and the ICJ 
Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence. 
 
4

* * *

1.2  
SUMMARY OF THE REPORT1 
As regards the political criteria, all relevant political actors took part in the early 
parliamentary elections on 3 April 2022, which resulted in a more pluralistic Parliament. 
However, the political and media landscapes remained polarised and continued to be 
dominated by the Serbian Progressive Party (SNS) and the incumbent President. Offensive 
language continued to be used against political opponents, both in Parliament and during the 
electoral campaign. Prior to the elections, a broad range of political actors engaged in the 
Inter-Party Dialogue, facilitated by the European Parliament.  
The April 2022 presidential and early parliamentary elections were held in a generally calm 
and peaceful atmosphere and fundamental freedoms were largely respected. However, 
international observers noted a number of shortcomings. According to the final report of the 
International Election Observation Mission, these shortcomings resulted in an uneven playing 
field favouring the incumbents. It is crucial that outstanding and new recommendations from 
the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) and Council of Europe 
bodies are fully implemented, in a transparent process, well ahead of any new elections and 
with the involvement and upon consulting expert civil society organisations. 
A new, more pluralistic Parliament was constituted on 1 August 2022. Due to significant 
delays in finalising the election results, there was no parliamentary activity, other than the 
inauguration of the President, for a period of over five months. The previous Parliament 
engaged constructively in the Inter-Party Dialogue and in implementing the measures 
identified therein. The use of urgent procedures remained at around 9%. The code of conduct 
still needs to be used more effectively in preventing and sanctioning the use of offensive and 
inappropriate language in Parliament.   
Further efforts are still needed to ensure systematic cooperation between the government and 
civil society. An enabling environment for developing and financing civil society 
organisations still needs to be created on the ground, as verbal attacks and smear campaigns 
against such organisations continued. 
Serbia is moderately prepared as regards public administration reform. Overall, limited 
progress was made in this area during the reporting period, when the start of implementation 
of the new strategic framework began. On human resources management, roughly half of 
senior manager positions are still filled on an acting basis. As regards policy development and 
coordination, no mechanism is yet in place to verify that the Public Policy Secretariat’s 
comments have been incorporated into the final draft versions of laws and policy documents 
submitted for government approval. On public financial management, action is still needed to 
fully implement the recommendation for a single mechanism for prioritising all investments 
regardless of type and source of financing.  
                                                            
 
1 This report covers the period from June 2021 to June 2022. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from the government of Serbia, the EU Member States, European Parliament reports and 
information from various international and non-governmental organisations. This also includes the results of 
comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular on the rule of law.  
The report uses the following assessment scales to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of 
preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made 
during the reporting period, it uses the following scale has been used: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, 
some progress, good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, also interim steps have been used. 
 
5 
 
Serbia has some level of preparation when it comes to its judicial system. Overall, some 
progress was made during the reporting period. Serbia took an important step towards 
strengtening the independence and accountability of the judiciary with the approval of 
relevant amendments to the Constitution in February 2022, together with the constitutional 
law setting out the steps and the deadlines for their implementation. The Venice Commission 
was consulted twice during the drafting process. It found that the process of public 
consultations was sufficiently inclusive and transparent. Most of the Venice Commission’s 
specific recommendations were addressed. The amendments provide that all judicial 
appointments (with the exception of the future Supreme Prosecutor) will be the competence of 
either the future High Judicial Council or the High Council of Prosecutors, increasing 
safeguards against potential political influence. In order to give practical effect to the 
constitutional amendments the relevant implementing legislation needs to be adopted as a 
next step. According to the constitutional law, this legislation should be adopted within 1 year 
for judicial laws and within 2 years for the alignment of all other relevant legislation. Two 
expert working groups (one for prosecutors, one for courts) were established in April 2022 
and tasked with the drafting of the implementing legislation. A first set of draft judicial laws 
were finalised in September 2022 and shared with the Venice Commission for opinion. The 
new human resources strategy and implementing action plan were adopted in December 2021. 
Their implementation is pending.  
Serbia has some level of preparation in the fight against corruption. Overall, some progress 
was made during the reporting period, including on last year’s recommendations. The 
recommendation on prevention of corruption has been further implemented, and the Council 
of Europe’s Group of States against Corruption (GRECO) concluded in March 2022 that the 
adoption of amendments to the Law on prevention of corruption had addressed the previously 
identified shortcomings and was sufficient to strengthen the framework aimed at preventing 
and combating conflicts of interest of members of Parliament, judges and prosecutors. Serbia 
has still to prepare a new anti-corruption strategy and action plan, and establish an effective 
coordination mechanism to operationalise prevention and repression policy goals and 
thoroughly address corruption. The number of indictments and first-instance convictions in 
high-level corruption cases has increased slightly. Serbia should further step up the prevention 
and repression of corruption. In particular, it should increase the final confiscation of assets 
linked to these cases. Those sectors most vulnerable to corruption require targeted risk 
assessments and dedicated action. 
In the fight against organised crime, Serbia has some level of preparation. Limited progress 
was made over the reporting period. The number of new investigations and final convictions 
increased in 2021 compared to 2020, however the number of indictments and first instance 
convictions decreased. The number of cases involving seizure and final confiscation of assets 
is still limited. Extended confiscation is not systematically applied. However, the level of 
understanding and the investigation approach have improved, which should lead to better 
results in the future. Serbia should move from a case-by-case approach to a strategy against 
criminal organisations, and from focusing on cases of low or medium importance to high- 
profile cases, aimed at dismantling big internationally spread organisations and seizing assets. 
Serbia’s legislative and institutional framework for upholding fundamental rights is broadly 
in place. Serbia adopted new strategies on anti-discrimination and Roma inclusion, as well as 
action plans on gender equality and Roma inclusion. Action plans, and related funding, in 
other areas were due in July 2021 (violence against women) and April 2022 (anti-
discrimination; de-institutionalisation) and are now overdue. More efforts are needed to 
comply with the Law on the planning system, which requires that action plans are adopted 
within three months of the adoption of related strategies. Serbia needs to strengthen human 
 
6 
 
rights institutions by allocating the necessary financial and human resources and by putting in 
place procedures to ensure compliance with the European Court of Human Rights’ measures, 
including interim measures. In September 2022, Europride was hosted for a first time in the 
Western Balkans, in Belgrade. The Europride route was banned, and the holding of the march 
was uncertain until the very last moment. The authorities claimed safety concerns related to 
threats by extreme right groups as the basis for their decision. An anti-Europride and, anti-
Western demonstration was also banned. Finally a march, via a shorter route took place on 17 
September 2022, without major incidents. A high number of law enforcement officers 
protected it, nevertheless, some instances of violence against the participants were reported.  
The period prior to the march was marked by legal and political uncertainty. The 
communication of the authorities was contradictory, with high level announcements that the 
march would be banned altogether and a subsequent ban issued by the Ministry of the Interior 
on the route of the march. Other high level politicians addressed the Europride Human Rights 
Conference and held a reception before the march. While the authorities maintained contacts 
with the organisers to find a solution, they remained non-committal about the parade going 
ahead with an official permit.   
 
Regarding freedom of expression, no progress was made in the reporting period. The two 
working groups on the safety of journalists continued to meet. In several cases of attacks and 
threats, the police and the prosecution reacted swiftly, also thanks to the coordination 
facilitated through those groups. However, cases of threats and violence against journalists 
remain a concern and the overall environment for the exercise of freedom of expression 
without hindrance still needs to be further strengthened in practice. Implementation of the 
media strategy experienced increasing delays, affecting even the most important measures 
such as amending the Law on public information and media and the Law on electronic media. 
In July 2022, the Regulatory Body for Electronic Media (REM) awarded all four national 
frequencies, for a period of eight years, to the same television channels as in the previous 
period, during which all of them had received warnings from REM due to violation of their 
legal obligations. A call for a fifth licence was published in August 2022; the process should 
be handled in a transparent manner, respecting the principle of media pluralism in the 
Audiovisual Media Services Directive. In its final report of 19 August 2022 on the April 
elections, ODIHR found that ‘the national public broadcasters had covered the campaign 
activities of all contestants equitably but provided extensive uncritical news coverage to 
public officials who were also candidates. Private broadcast media with national coverage 
presented the election campaign without meaningful editorial input and focused their news 
coverage on state officials.’ ODIHR also found that ‘despite its mandate to oversee the 
broadcast media, REM remained overall passive in the campaign period.’  
On the economic criteria, Serbia is between a good and moderate level of preparation and 
has made some progress in developing a functioning market economy. After a relatively mild 
contraction in 2020, the Serbian economy rebounded strongly in 2021 followed by some 
deceleration in the first half of 2022. After decreasing in 2020, external imbalances started to 
widen in the second half of 2021, in particular due to high energy imports. Consumer price 
inflation surged in the second half of 2021, mostly driven by energy and food prices, which 
led the central bank to start tightening its policy stance. Banking sector stability was preserved 
and lending growth remained robust despite the phasing-out of liquidity-enhancing measures. 
The economic rebound and the reduction of fiscal support measures helped to substantially 
improve the budget balance in 2021, despite a further increase in capital spending. A slight 
increase in the unemployment rate in 2021 reflected in particular a rising labour market 
participation as part of the rebound from the COVID-19 crisis.   
 
7 
 
There has been some progress with tax administration reforms and the privatisation of state-
owned enterprises. However, other major structural reforms of public administration and of 
the governance of state owned enterprises (SOEs) continued to advance slowly, prolonging 
long standing inefficiencies and increasing fiscal pressure. There has been no progress in 
strengthening fiscal rules to anchor fiscal policy. The state retains a strong footprint in the 
economy and the private sector is underdeveloped and hampered by weaknesses in the rule of 
law, in particular corruption and judicial inefficiency, and in the enforcement of fair 
competition. Last years’ recommendations have been partially implemented. 
Serbia is moderately prepared and has made some progress in coping with competitive 
pressure and market forces within the EU. The structure of the economy improved further 
and economic integration with the EU remained high. However, despite some progress, the 
quality and relevance of education and training does not fully meet labour market needs. 
Public investment has continued to increase with the aim of addressing serious infrastructure 
gaps after years of underinvestment. Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) still face a 
number of challenges, including an uneven playing field as compared to large companies and 
foreign investors. Last year’s recommendations have been partially implemented. 
On good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation, Serbia remained committed 
overall to improving bilateral relations with other candidate countries, potential candidates 
and neighbouring EU Member States. However, relations with Croatia are increasingly under 
strain, with occasional political altercations. Relations with Montenegro remain challenging 
but both sides have signalled greater willigness to reset relations and work toward adressing 
open issues. In general, Serbia actively participates in regional cooperation.  
The EU-facilitated Dialogue on the normalisation of relations with Kosovo continued 
throughout the reporting period with regular monthly meetings on the level of Chief 
Negotiators and a High-level meeting in Brussels on 18 August 2022. No further concrete 
progress was yet achieved in the negotiations on the comprehensive and legally-binding 
normalisation agreement, while in the High-level meeting President Vučić and Prime Minister 
Kurti agreed to regular meetings on the level of Leaders to take the negotiations forward. 
Kosovo and Serbia are now urged to engage constructively and advance the negotiations on 
the comprehensive, legally-binding normalisation agreement with no further delay. Reaching 
such an agreement is urgent and crucial so that Kosovo and Serbia can advance on their 
respective European paths.  
Regarding Serbia’s ability to assume the obligations of EU membership, the country 
continued the work on alignment with the EU acquis in many areas, particularly on company 
law, intellectual property rights, research and innovation and financial control.  
The internal market cluster is key for Serbia’s preparations for the requirements of the EU’s 
internal market and is highly relevant for early integration and the development of the 
Common Regional Market. Progress was achieved in several areas within the cluster, 
particularly on legislative alignment on company law; freedom of movement for workers 
through coordination of social security systems; and legislative alignment on the free 
movement of goods.  
The competitiveness and inclusive growth cluster has significant links to Serbia’s Economic 
Reform Programme. Progress was achieved in some areas under this cluster, particularly: 
social policy and employment through steps towards establishing the Youth Guarantee 
scheme; economic and monetary policy through improvements of the budget process; 
enterprise industrial policy through an action plan for the strategy on state ownership and 
management of business entities owned by the Republic of Serbia, and the creation of the e-
consultation portal; scientific and technological development through the new strategy for 
 
8 
 
developing start-up ecosystem; and education through steps towards ensuing compliance of 
the quality assurance system in higher education with the recommendations of the European 
Association for Quality Assurance in Higher Education (ENQA).  
The Green agenda and sustainable connectivity cluster is at the heart of the Green Agenda 
for the Western Balkans2 and closely linked to Serbia’s Economic Reform Programme and 
the Commission’s Economic and Investment Plan3. The cluster and all related chapters were 
opened in December 2021, after Serbia had fulfilled the remaining requirements, namely the 
adoption of action plans on oil stocks and on gas unbundling. Limited progress was achieved 
overall with the exception of Trans-European networks, where Serbia advanced on upgrading 
its infrastructure, with works starting on the Serbia-Bulgaria gas interconnector, a strategically 
highly important project for Serbia and Europe.  
The cluster on resources, agriculture and cohesion comprises policies linked to EU 
structural funds and to developing capacity to assume the responsibilities of a future Member 
State. It also comprises some of the key policy areas crucial for ensuring sustainable food 
systems and helping rural communities to develop and diversify economically. Two out of 
five chapters are open (Chapters 13 and 33) with closing benchmarks still to be fulfilled in 
each chapter. The Commission has assessed that the opening benchmarks have been met for 
Chapters 11 and 22, while Serbia still has to meet all three opening benchmarks for chapter 
12. Limited progress was achieved in some areas, e.g. submission of the IPARD III 
programme for 2021-2027; adoption and implementation of the law on plant protection 
products; classification of food establishments and establishments handling animal by-
products; financial and budgetary provisions as regards the underlying policy areas affecting 
the correct functioning of the own resources system; and regional policy as regards financial 
management.  
On the external relations cluster, Serbia is yet to finalise its accession to the World Trade 
Organization which is one of the opening benchmarks for chapter 30. Serbia should also 
abstain from introducing unilateral trade restrictive measures without prior consultation of the 
Commission, in line with its SAA obligations. Following Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified 
agression against Ukraine, Serbia did not align with the EU restrictive measures against 
Russia and majority of Declarations by the High Representative on behalf of the EU on this 
matter. Serbia’s alignment rate with relevant High Representative declarations on behalf of 
the EU and Council Decisions therefore dropped from 64 % in 2021 to 45 % in August 2022. 
A number of actions and statements by Serbia went against EU foreign policy positions. 
Serbia is expected, as a matter of priority, to fulfill its commitment and progressively align 
with the EU Common Foreign and Security Policy, including with EU restrive measures, in 
line with EU-Serbia negotiating framework.  
Serbia continued to contribute to the management of the mixed migration flows towards the 
EU by cooperating effectively with its neighbours and EU Member States. Efforts continued 
to host and accommodate substantial numbers of third-country nationals, with EU support. 
Serbia decided on 17 March 2022 to grant Ukrainian nationals having fled Russia’s war on 
Ukraine temporary protection for 1 year. It also continued to implement the integrated border 
management strategy and its action plan effectively. Serbia took no steps to align with the 
EU’s list of visa required third countries, in particular with those third countries which present 
                                                            
 
2 SWD(2020) 223 final. 
3 COM(2020) 641 final.