1.1  
CONTEXT  
The European Council granted Serbia the status of candidate country in 2012. Since the 
opening of Serbia’s accession negotiations in January 2014, 18 out of 35 chapters have been 
opened, including all chapters in cluster 1 on the fundamentals. Two chapters have been 
provisionally closed. Serbia accepted the revised enlargement methodology and a first 
political inter-governmental conference was held in June 2021. This revised methodology 
focuses on the following aspects: (i) a stronger focus on the fundamental reforms, (ii) a 
stronger political steer, (iii) an increased dynamism, and (iv) the predictability of the process. 
The overall pace of negotiations will continue to depend in particular on the pace of rule of 
law reforms and on the normalisation of Serbia’s relations with Kosovo.  
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) between Serbia and the EU entered into 
force in September 2013. Serbia continued to implement the SAA, although a number of 
compliance issues remain.  
The Serbian government continued to declare European integration as its strategic goal and 
restructured the Ministry for European Integration to respond to the requirements of the 
revised methodology. The government prioritised EU-related reforms in the first half of 2021 
and made the rule of law agenda one of its key priorities and fields of action. The government 
further delivered on a number of important outstanding benchmarks under clusters 3 
(competitiveness and inclusive growth) and 4 (green agenda and sustainable connectivity). 
Therefore the Commission has recommended that the opening benchmarks in these clusters 
were fulfilled and the clusters should be opened. Effective policy planning and coordination, 
and sufficient human and financial resources on EU accession across all institutions involved 
need to be in place to match the government’s renewed political focus. In line with their EU 
accession objective, the Serbian authorities need to place more emphasis on proactive and 
objective communication about the EU, which is Serbia’s main political and economic 
partner.  
The COVID-19 pandemic continued throughout the reporting period. By early October 2021, 
Serbia had recorded around 974 000 cases and around 8 000 deaths due to the pandemic and 
administered around 6.3 million doses of vaccines. The Serbian economy recorded only a 
mild contraction – 1 % – in 2020, as the impact of the pandemic was mitigated by a strong 
pre-pandemic momentum, sizeable and timely fiscal and monetary support measures, a low 
dependency on the sectors of the economy hit most such as tourism, and a relatively short 
duration of containment measures. The fiscal space created prior to the crisis allowed Serbia 
to provide substantial fiscal support for crisis mitigation in 2020 and 2021 and to increase 
capital spending substantially. 
The EU continued to provide essential support to Serbia. It has allocated EUR 78.4 million to 
Serbia for socioeconomic recovery and EUR 15 million for immediate needs such as medical 
equipment, support to vulnerable groups in society, and exceptionally, the hiring of 200 extra 
medical workers to alleviate the pressure on medical personnel. In addition, almost EUR 12 
million has been allocated to Serbia as part of the EU Solidarity Fund. The EU provided a 
grant of over EUR 27 million to Serbia so it could purchase vaccines from EU Member 
States, as well as equipment related to the ongoing vaccination campaign. Serbia can also 
benefit from a EUR 7 million regional EU project implemented by the World Health 
Organization, to support safe and effective vaccination in the Western Balkans. By early 
                                                          
 This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is line with UNSCR 1244/1999 and the ICJ 
Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence. 
 
4 
 
October 2021, Serbia had received around 8.3 million vaccines from different suppliers and 
had fully vaccinated around 2.75 million people (around 40% of the population). Serbia has 
become a regional vaccination hub and has donated around 600 000 vaccines to other 
countries in the Western Balkans, including North Macedonia, Montenegro and Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. It has also vaccinated thousands of foreign nationals, mainly from within this 
same region.  
Given the European perspective of the Western Balkans, the EU has continued to treat the 
region as privileged partners by associating them with the EU’s mechanisms and instruments, 
including the Health Security Committee, joint procurement agreements, Union Civil 
Protection Mechanism, Solidarity Fund, consular assistance in repatriation, and exemption 
from temporary EU export restrictions of medical equipment. The European Commission 
continues to recommend that emergency measures taken in the context of the COVID-19 
pandemic be proportionate, restricted to what is necessary and limited in time so that rule of 
law and democratic and human rights standards are upheld.

* * *

1.2  
SUMMARY OF THE REPORT1 2 
As regards the political criteria, the Serbian Parliament and political forces continued to 
engage in the inter-party dialogue led by the European Parliament, with a view to forging 
broad cross-party consensus on EU-related reforms, which is vital for the country’s progress 
on its EU path. However, the political climate during the reporting period remained polarised. 
For the process to be successful, all political actors need to engage constructively and in good 
faith, and implement the measures identified in September 2021 by the Co-facilitators from 
the European and Serbian Parliament during the inter-party dialogue.  
On elections, Serbia started addressing long-standing recommendations by the Office for 
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation 
in Europe (OSCE/ODIHR) and the government reinstated the relevant working group on 
elections. All key recommendations should be implemented in an inclusive and transparent 
manner, based on wider political consensus and well ahead of the next elections. 
The Serbian Parliament’s mandate, which was formally constituted in August 2020, has been 
limited in time from the start, as the political leadership announced new elections for no later 
than spring 2022. Overall, the Parliament significantly reduced the use of urgent procedures 
and adopted a new code of conduct for Members of Parliament. However, inflammatory 
language against political opponents and representatives of other institutions expressing 
diverging political views was still used during parliamentary debates. All politicians should 
counter hate speech and contribute to a political dialogue on EU-related reforms, particularly 
on the fundamentals of democracy and the rule of law. 
A newly created Ministry for human and minority rights and social dialogue initiated a series 
of public dialogues. However, further efforts are still needed to ensure systematic cooperation 
between the government and civil society. An enabling environment for developing and 
                                                          
1 This report covers the period from June 2020 to June 2021. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from the government of Serbia, the EU Member States, European Parliament reports and 
information from various international and non-governmental organisations. This also includes the results of 
comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular on the rule of law. 
2 For the state of play the report uses the following assessment scales: early stage, some level of preparation, 
moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. For progress made during the reporting 
period, the following scale has been used: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, good 
progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, also interim steps have been used. 
 
 
5 
 
financing civil society organisations (CSOs) still needs to be established on the ground, as 
verbal attacks against CSOs continued, including in Parliament. 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of public administration reform. Limited progress 
was made overall during the reporting period. Serbia still needs to ensure (i) merit-based 
recruitment and a reduction in the excessive number of acting senior manager positions, (ii) a 
strong quality control role for the Public Policy Secretariat in policy development and 
coordination, and (iii) a single mechanism for prioritising all investments regardless of the 
type and source of financing.  
Serbia’s judicial system has some level of preparation. Limited  progress was made over the 
reporting period. The constitutional reform of the judiciary was relaunched in December 
2020, and is planned to be finalised by the end of 2021. The system for judicial appointments 
and for evaluating the work of judges and prosecutors needs to be thoroughly revised 
following the adoption of the constitutional amendments, to allow for merit-based judicial 
recruitments and careers since the current legal framework does not provide sufficient 
guarantees against potential political influence over the judiciary.  
Serbia has some level of preparation in the fight against corruption. Limited progress was 
made over the reporting period. As regards the prevention of corruption, the Council of 
Europe’s Group of States against Corruption (GRECO) concluded that its recommendation on 
the Agency for the Prevention of Corruption was fulfilled in a satisfactory manner. This 
recommendation concerned the need for an adequate degree of independence and financial 
and personnel resources as well as on extending the Agency’s competence. Serbia has yet to 
adopt a new anti-corruption strategy accompanied by an action plan and to establish an 
effective coordination mechanism to operationalise prevention or repression policy goals and 
effectively address corruption. The number of indictments and the number of first instance 
convictions for high-level corruption cases further decreased compared to previous years. 
Serbia should increase its efforts in addressing these shortcomings and step up the prevention 
and repression of corruption. 
In the fight against organised crime, Serbia has some level of preparation. Limited progress 
was made over the reporting period. Serbia has yet to establish a convincing track record of 
effective investigations, prosecutions and final convictions in serious and organised crime 
cases, including financial investigations leading to a track record of freezing and confiscating 
criminal assets. The number of convictions for organised crime decreased compared to 2019. 
Serbia should adapt its approach from one based on cases to a strategy against organisations, 
and from focusing on cases of low or medium importance to high profile cases aiming at 
dismantling big and internationally spread organisations and seizing the assets. 
Serbia’s legislative and institutional framework for upholding fundamental rights is broadly 
in place. However, it needs to ensure the framework is consistently and efficiently 
implemented. Human rights institutions need to be strengthened and their independence 
guaranteed, including by means of allocating the necessary financial and human resources. 
Regarding freedom of expression, limited progress was made by adopting and starting to 
implement a limited number of measures under the action plan related to the media strategy. 
However, verbal attacks against journalists by high-level officials continued and cases of 
threats and violence remain a concern. Most media associations withdrew from the group on 
the safety of journalists in March 2021, citing hate speech and smear campaigns against 
journalists and civil society representatives, including by the head of the ruling party caucus 
in Parliament. These verbal attacks in Parliament took place even after a code of conduct was 
adopted in December 2020. The overall environment for exercising freedom of expression 
without hindrance still needs to be further strengthened in practice.  
 
6 
 
On the economic criteria, Serbia has made some progress and is moderately prepared/at a 
good level of preparation in developing a functioning market economy. The Serbian 
economy recorded only a mild contraction in 2020 as the impact of the COVID-19 crisis was 
mitigated by a strong pre-crisis momentum, sizeable and timely fiscal and monetary support 
measures, the sectoral structure of the economy and a relatively low average stringency of 
containment measures. External imbalances narrowed in the crisis while their financing 
continued to be fully covered by Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) inflows. The fiscal space 
created prior to the crisis allowed Serbia to provide substantial fiscal support for crisis 
mitigation in 2020 and 2021 and to substantially increase capital spending. Banking sector 
stability was preserved and lending growth was robust, supported by monetary easing, loan 
moratoria and liquidity-enhancing measures. The labour market has recorded a further 
decrease in unemployment in 2020, reflecting in particular lower participation rates during the 
crisis.   
There has been some progress with tax administration reforms and the privatisation of state-
owned banks. However, other major structural reforms of public administration and 
state-owned enterprises (SOEs) continued to advance slowly, prolonging long-standing 
inefficiencies. There has been no progress in strengthening the fiscal rules to anchor fiscal 
policy. The state retains a strong footprint in the economy and the private sector is 
underdeveloped and hampered by weaknesses in the rule of law, in particular corruption and 
judicial inefficiency, and in the enforcement of fair competition. 
Serbia has made some progress and is moderately prepared to cope with competitive 
pressure and market forces within the EU. The structure of the economy improved further 
and economic integration with the EU remained high. However, despite some progress, the 
quality and relevance of education and training do not fully meet labour market needs. Public 
investment has continued to increase with the aim to address serious infrastructure gaps after 
years of underinvestment. Although the cost of borrowing for small and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs) has declined, they still face a number of challenges, including a volatile 
business environment and unfair competition. 
On good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation, Serbia overall remained 
committed to bilateral relations with other enlargement countries and neighbouring EU 
Member States. However, relations with Montenegro have been marked by continued 
tensions. In general, Serbia actively participates in regional cooperation.  
Regarding the normalisation of relations with Kosovo, the EU-facilitated dialogue 
continued with high-level meetings on 15 June and 19 July 2021, as well as three chief 
negotiators’ meetings. During the reporting period, both parties appointed new chief 
negotiators and negotiating teams. Serbia needs to make further substantial efforts on the 
implementation of all past agreements and contribute to reaching a comprehensive legally 
binding normalisation agreement with Kosovo. Such an agreement is urgent and crucial so 
that Kosovo and Serbia can advance on their respective European paths.  
Concerning Serbia’s ability to assume the obligations of EU membership, the country has 
carried out important work on alignment with EU acquis over many areas, particularly on 
taxation and energy.  
The cluster on internal market is key for Serbia’s preparations for meeting the requirements 
of the EU’s internal market and is highly relevant for possible early integration measures and 
the development of the Common Regional Market. Progress was made on legislative 
alignment on company law, freedom of movement for workers and the establishment and