1.1 CONTEXT 
Since Serbia’s accession negotiations opened in January 2014, 22 out of 35 chapters have 
been opened. These include all chapters under cluster 1 on the fundamentals and under 
cluster 4 on the green agenda and sustainable connectivity. Two chapters have provisionally 
been closed. The Commission’s recommendations from previous years remain valid, that 
Serbia has fulfilled the opening benchmarks for cluster 3 (competitiveness and inclusive 
growth) and that this cluster is technically ready to open. The overall pace of negotiations 
will continue to depend on the rule of law reforms and the normalisation of Serbia’s relations 
with Kosovo*. 
The Serbian government has continued to declare EU membership its strategic goal, and it 
set a new, more ambitious target date of the end of 2026 to meet technical criteria for 
membership. Meeting Serbia’s objectives for EU accession negotiations requires strong 
political will, a whole-of-society approach, effective policy planning and coordination, along 
with sufficient human and financial resources for EU accession across all institutions 
involved. There is an anti-EU narrative evident not only in Serbian media outlets but also 
used by political office holders, including at highest levels. As a matter of priority, the 
Serbian authorities still need to take much more responsibility for proactive and more 
objective communication on Serbia’s EU accession process and the EU and for countering 
disinformation and information manipulation. 
On 1 November 2024, the fall of a canopy at the Novi Sad railway station caused the death 
of 16 people. This tragic event prompted mass nation-wide student and citizen protests and 
blockades across the country over corruption and the perceived lack of accountability and 
transparency at government level with reports of excessive use of force against protesters. 
The incident and the aftermath has further deepened the polarisation in Serbian society. The 
protests continue to take place. 
In the reporting period, the EU-facilitated Dialogue on normalisation of relations between 
Serbia and Kosovo continued. Domestic political preoccupations on both sides have 
hindered decisive steps towards implementing the 2023 Agreement on the Path to 
Normalisation and its implementation annex and thereby progressing on normalising their 
relations. Constructive engagement in the normalisation is also a requirement under the 
Reform and Growth Facility for the Western Balkans. 
Serbia has actively engaged in and started to deliver on the implementation of the new 
 
1 This report covers the period from 1 September 2024 to 1 September 2025. It is based on input from 
a variety of sources, including contributions from the government of Serbia, EU Member States, 
European Parliament reports and information from various international and non-governmental 
organisations. It also includes the results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other 
stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of law. 
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level 
of preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe 
progress made during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, 
limited progress, some progress, good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim 
steps have also been used. 
* This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is line with UNSCR 1244/1999 and 
the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence. 
 
4 
 
Growth Plan for the Western Balkans across all four pillars of gradual integration with the 
EU: single market, regional economic integration, fundamental reforms and increased 
financial support. Under the Reform and Growth Facility, a performance-based EU 
instrument that supports the EU accession process, the country adopted its Reform Agenda. 
The Reform Agenda covers reforms in the areas of: (i) business environment and private-
sector development; (ii) green and digital transition; (iii) human capital; (iv) fundamental 
rights and the rule of law. 
The Commission’s 2025 rule of law report2 covered Serbia for the second time.

* * *

1.2 MAIN FINDINGS OF THE REPORTS 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
Democracy 
Tangible improvements and further reforms are needed in the conduct of elections. It is vital 
that all outstanding recommendations by the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human 
Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) and the Council of Europe bodies are fully implemented, in a 
transparent and inclusive process and well ahead of any new elections. 
Parliament’s effectiveness and oversight function remain hampered by the low frequency of 
sessions and the lack of genuine political debate. Public scrutiny and involvement in the 
legislative process were limited and debates continued to be marked by tensions between 
the ruling coalition and the opposition. Parliamentary rules of procedure and the Code of 
Conduct to penalise offences by parliamentarians need to be consistently applied. 
The institutions in charge of the EU integration process are in place. The government has 
advanced its strategic objective to meet all EU criteria by the end of 2026 but is yet to show 
genuine political will to deliver on EU-related priorities and speed up the preparations 
accordingly. The current deep societal polarisation, as well as persistent anti-EU rhetoric, run 
counter to this objective. The authorities have yet to achieve more proactive and objective 
communication about the EU and Serbia’s accession process. The increasingly difficult 
environment for civil society has led to the decision by civil society organisations to suspend 
cooperation with the authorities. This has in turn affected the inclusiveness of the EU 
integration process. 
The government was in a caretaker capacity between 19 March (when Parliament took note 
of the Prime Minister’s resignation) and 16 April 2025, when a new government was 
appointed. The reform of the local government system continued to advance slowly. 
Civil society organisations (CSOs) in Serbia operate in an increasingly difficult environment. 
Since the start of the protests, CSOs advocating for the rule of law have faced intensified 
verbal attacks and smear campaigns, including by high-level officials. Complaints were filed 
against the use of spyware targeting human rights defenders and journalists. Strategic 
lawsuits against public participation (SLAPPs) increasingly hindered CSOs’ work. Several 
foreign CSO representatives, including from EU Member States, were expelled from Serbia 
and some were subsequently banned from entering the country. In February 2025, the police 
searched the offices of four CSOs at the request of the Special Anti-Corruption Department 
 
2 COM(2025) 900 final. 
 
5 
 
of the Higher Public Prosecutor’s Office in Belgrade. To date, the searches have not resulted 
in any judicial proceedings and they have been widely perceived as an act of pressure on 
civil society. Cooperation between the government and CSOs has been under strain. There is 
still significant scope to improve the transparency of public funding to civil society. 
Public administration reform  
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of public administration reform and overall there 
has been no progress during the reporting period.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ reduce the excessive number of acting positions and allocate sufficient resources to run 
effective, merit-based recruitment processes; 
→ strengthen the mechanism for systematically integrating opinions issued by the Public 
Policy Secretariat into draft laws and policy documents, in line with the Law on the 
planning system; 
→ put in place a unified, comprehensive and transparent system for capital investment 
planning and management, in line with the Reform Agenda. 
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights 
Serbia has reached some level of preparation and has made no progress. 
Functioning of the judiciary 
Serbia is between having some and a moderate level of preparation in the area of judiciary. 
No progress was made overall during the reporting the period. Whilst the case management 
system for prosecutor offices was finalised, Serbia still lacks a comprehensive court case 
management system. Several judges and prosecutors were elected in 2024 and 2025, but a 
considerable number of vacancies remain to be filled. Undue pressure on the judiciary 
remains a concern, with little or no follow-up from relevant institutions, and there are 
concerns about prosecutorial autonomy. Four vacant positions at the Constitutional Court 
still need to be filled. Serbia has yet to show a genuine commitment to investigating and 
adjudicating war crimes cases, including by appointing a Chief Public Prosecutor for War 
Crimes. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ adopt the Law on the Judicial Academy in line with the Venice Commission 
recommendations and carry out the appointments of judges and prosecutors in line with 
the legal framework, in particular to fill the vacant positions in the Constitutional Court; 
→ reduce political interference in the judiciary and prosecution services and ensure that the 
High Judicial Council and the High Prosecutorial Council, the government and 
Parliament defend judicial independence and prosecutorial autonomy effectively and 
proactively in cases of undue influence; 
→ make the uniform and centralised case management systems operational; improve the 
efficiency of the justice system, in particular by reducing the backlogs and disposition 
times for the Administrative and Constitutional Courts and fully implement the human 
resources and ICT strategies. 
 
 
6 
 
Fight against corruption 
Serbia is between having some and a moderate level of preparation in the fight against 
corruption. Overall, it has made limited progress. In December 2024, Serbia adopted an 
action plan for the national anti-corruption strategy for 2024-2025. Overall, corruption is 
prevalent in many areas and remains an issue of concern. The canopy collapse at Novi Sad 
railway station prompted widespread public protests over corruption and the perceived lack 
of accountability and transparency in government infrastructure and construction projects. 
The authorities launched investigations into alleged corruption linked to the tragic incident, 
which have yet to be completed. There is a need for stronger political will to tackle 
corruption effectively, establish a robust track record and put in place a robust criminal 
justice response, including action on high-level corruption. The role and mandate of the 
Prosecutor’s Office for Organised Crime is insufficiently regulated in the law. Targeted risk 
assessments and specific measures are also needed to tackle corruption in the most 
vulnerable sectors. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented only to a limited 
extent and therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ further improve its track record on investigations, prosecutions and final court decisions 
in high-level corruption cases, in particular the seizure and confiscation of criminal 
assets and ensuring the systematic use of parallel financial investigations; strengthen 
the mandate of the Public Prosecutor’s Office for Organised Crime to increase its 
effectiveness; 
→ address all GRECO recommendations, in particular from the fifth evaluation round; 
establish a constructive relationship with the Anti-Corruption Council and systematically 
consult the Council on draft legislation; 
→ implement the anti-corruption action plan (2024-2025) accompanying the anti-corruption 
strategy as well as adopt and start implementing the action plan for 2026-2028, 
including by establishing an effective monitoring, evaluation and coordination 
mechanism to track progress and impact, while focusing on all relevant interim 
benchmarks and GRECO recommendations. 
Fundamental rights 
While Serbia’s legislative and institutional framework for upholding fundamental rights is 
broadly in place, implementation of this framework needs to be improved as a matter of 
priority. Independent bodies have issued only little, or late, public reaction to human rights 
violations in the context of the protests. While freedom of assembly was generally ensured 
and protests allowed to take place, the safety of participants was not always guaranteed, 
and several violent incidents against demonstrators and journalists occurred, with reported 
cases of excessive use of force by the police. To date, only some perpetrators have been 
prosecuted, while several others were pardoned from criminal prosecution by the President. 
Such incidents intensified over the summer. The European Court of Human Rights issued an 
interim measure on the alleged use by the authorities of a sonic weapon for crowd control at 
demonstrations in Belgrade; there was no credible follow-up yet by the authorities which 
denied such use. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ ensure people can effectively exercise their right to freedom of assembly and strengthen 
the resources of human rights institutions, ensuring they exercise their mandates to the 
 
7 
 
full and put in place procedures to ensure compliance with the decisions issued by the 
European Court of Human Rights, including interim measures; 
→ adopt and allocate sufficient resources to implement the pending strategies or action 
plans on violence against women, deinstitutionalisation, anti-discrimination – including 
the rights of LGBTIQ persons – and violence against children; actively counter hate 
crimes and build up a track record of investigations and convictions; 
→ adopt the pending action plan on national minorities and demonstrate, through better 
data collection, real improvements in the effective exercise of the rights of individuals 
belonging to national minorities, including reference to the targets set by the Poznan 
Declaration on Roma3 inclusion. 
Freedom of expression 
Serbia has some level of preparation in the area of freedom of expression. Although Serbia 
amended its media legislation to align further with the EU acquis and European standards, 
there was backsliding during the reporting period as the environment for journalists, media 
professionals and outlets seriously worsened. Recurrent statements by high-level officials 
on the work of journalists have a chilling effect on the freedom of expression. Cases of 
strategic lawsuits against public participation (SLAPPs) increasingly hindered the work of 
investigative media. The media laws of 2023 have also been inconsistently implemented. In 
particular, the media regulator, REM, failed to fully exercise its mandate and serious 
concerns persisted regarding its independence in practice. The Parliament did not elect a 
new REM Council by the legal deadline of 4 November 2024 and, as a result, Serbia has been 
without the decision-making body of the media regulator since then. However, the process 
of selection has recently advanced with international facilitation. Political and economic 
influence on the media, including on editorial policy, is a source of serious concern.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ implement the new media laws in a way that respects both their letter and spirit, 
including on the independence of the media regulator, and amend the laws to align with 
the European Media Freedom Act and related European standards and in line with its 
adopted media strategy; 
→ strengthen the protection and safety of journalists, notably by ensuring that: (i) high-level 
officials stop verbal attacks on journalists involving intimidation, stigmatisation and de-
legitimisation; and (ii) swiftly follow up any threats or cases of physical and verbal 
violence and publicly condemn, investigate or prosecute any such cases, as appropriate; 
→ ensure transparent and equitable co-funding for media content serving the public 
interest, and full transparency in media ownership and advertising. 
 
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security 
Serbia is between having some and a moderate level of preparation in the field of justice, 
freedom and security and has made limited progress. Serbia continued to contribute to the 
management of mixed migration flows to the EU by playing an active and constructive role 
 
3 In line with the terminology of European institutions, the umbrella term ‘Roma’ is used here to refer 
to a number of different groups, without denying the particular features of these groups. 
 
8 
 
and by cooperating effectively with its neighbours, EU Member States and EU agencies. The 
EU-Serbia status agreement entered into force on 1 April 2025. Serbia took steps to align 
with the EU visa policy by reinstating visa requirements for nationals of Kuwait, Mongolia, 
Oman and Qatar in December 2024. However, Serbia’s visa policy is still only partially in line 
with the EU list of visa-required third countries. The acquisition of visa-free travel rights to 
the EU for nationals of Russia by granting them Serbian citizenship poses potential security 
risks for the EU. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ amend the Law on internal affairs to make the police fully autonomous from the Ministry 
of Interior and fully accountable only to the Prosecutor’s Office during pre-investigation 
and investigation phases;  
→ further align with the EU’s visa policy and ensure a rigorous screening of visa-free 
arrivals of third-country nationals, particularly from countries presenting security or 
irregular migration risks; apply rigorous security screening when granting Serbian 
citizenship to third-country nationals, since Serbian passport holders benefit from visa 
free travel to the EU; take measures to systematically register and identify migrants, 
develop swift asylum procedures and increase the capacity to manage effective return 
operations; ensure that legal pathways developed for third country nationals entering 
Serbia prevent secondary movements to the EU;  
→ adopt new strategies and action plans to combat cybercrime, small arms and light 
weapons control, and drugs. 
Fight against serious and organised crime 
Serbia has some level of preparation and has made limited progress. Authorities continued 
to cooperate actively with the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Training 
(CEPOL), Eurojust, Europol and Interpol, notably on drugs trafficking and the fight against 
organised crime groups.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ improve the efficiency of prosecuting serious and organised crime cases, including 
money laundering cases and the seizure and confiscation of criminal assets by the 
systematic tracking of money flows, the effective use of financial investigations and 
special investigative measures, and the systemic use of extended confiscation; 
→ amend the Criminal Code to effectively criminalise the trafficking of weapons, adopt the 
new Law on weapons and ammunition and step up the fight against the storage, sale 
and ownership of illegal firearms; adopt the Law on trafficking in human beings; 
→ take specific steps to ensure a clear separation between mandates and regulations 
concerning criminal investigations carried out by law enforcement institutions and 
security measures executed by the Security Information Agency (BIA). 
Economic criteria  
The existence of a functioning market economy 
Serbia has a good level of preparation and has made limited progress in developing a 
functioning market economy. 
In 2024, economic activity was robust, but slowed markedly in the first half of 2025 while 
external imbalances increased. The budget deficit turned out lower than planned in 2024 
 
9 
 
and monetary policy remained relatively tight, which helped inflation return to the target 
band. The banking sector remained stable, and the labour market improved further. Serbia 
postponed the full application of some fiscal rules and the reform of the public sector wage 
system faced further delays. State aid rules are not always implemented due to strong 
political pressure to provide financial assistance to state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and 
large foreign investors. SOEs continue to have an outsized presence in many structurally 
important sectors. The business environment is hampered by red tape, weaknesses in the 
rule of law and limited efficiency and transparency of the public administration. The 
government has interfered significantly in the goods market by instituting on a very short 
notice a 20% margin cap for a wide variety of goods from 1 September 2025 for the 
following 6 months. While it is intended to benefit consumers through lower inflation, the 
measure risks causing market distortions and having a negative impact on investment. 
Last year’s recommendations were implemented to a limited extent and therefore remain 
largely valid. To improve the functioning of the market economy, Serbia should in particular: 
→ keep an appropriately tight policy stance to maintain price stability, including by 
containing current spending; 
→ swiftly advance the reform of the public sector wage system; 
→ adopt implementing legislation to fully implement the SOE law and strengthen SOE 
governance to reduce the associated fiscal risks. 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union 
Serbia is between a moderate and a good level of preparation and has made some progress 
in coping with competitive pressure and market forces in the EU. The manufacturing and 
service sectors are well-developed, benefiting from close economic integration with the EU. 
Serbia has made some progress in facilitating the school-to-work transition. Educational 
outcomes are below the OECD average and public spending on education and research 
remains below the EU average. There are wide infrastructure gaps, especially in certain 
sectors, despite higher government investment. Digital transformation is well advanced. 
SMEs still face obstacles, including an uneven playing field compared with large companies 
and foreign investors. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year have been partially implemented. Over 
the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ improve education outcomes and skills, including by increasing enrolment rates, 
modernising vocational education and training, and stepping up lifelong learning; 
→ further strengthen public investment management, including by putting in place a single, 
comprehensive and transparent system for prioritising and selecting all public 
investments, regardless of the type and source of financing and in line with the best 
international standards; 
→ further advance green transition reforms, connectivity and diversify sources of energy 
imports. 
Chapter 5: Public procurement 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of public procurement. It made limited progress 
by increasing the use of green and social procurement, as well as the price and quality 
criterion for contract award. 
 
10 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and remain largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ further align its legislation with the 2014 EU directives on public procurement, in 
particular by amending the Law on public-private partnerships and concessions and by 
ensuring that projects are subject to public procurement procedures; 
→ ensure that procurement rules under intergovernmental agreements with third countries 
comply with the public procurement principles, in line with the EU acquis; 
→ further strengthen the capacity of the Public Procurement Office, the Commission for 
Public-Private Partnerships and Concessions, the Republic Commission for the 
Protection of Rights in Public Procedures and the Administrative Court. 
Chapter 18 - Statistics  
Serbia is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of statistics. 
Some progress was made during the reporting period with continued improvements in 
the compilation of macroeconomic statistics, in line with the European System of Accounts 
(ESA 2010).  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ adopt a new statistical law to increase the statistical office’s professional independence, 
while taking into account the revised Regulation (EC) No 223/2009; 
→ continue to improve the compilation of macroeconomic statistics in line with the 
European System of Accounts (ESA 2010).  
Chapter 32: Financial control 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of financial control. Limited progress was made in 
the reporting period, notably by adopting the managerial accountability roadmap. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ ensure the public internal financial control (PIFC) legal basis is fully consistent with the 
general legal framework; 
→ create an effective internal audit function in all central budget institutions;  
→ implement the managerial accountability roadmap swiftly and effectively. 
 
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET 
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of free movement of goods. Limited progress was 
made during the reporting period with the revision of the strategic documents under this 
chapter in accordance with Commission’s assessment. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and remain valid. In the coming year Serbia should, in particular: 
→ ensure timely implementation of the strategic documents ensuring compliance with 
Articles 34-36 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) and all the 
EU acquis in this chapter; 
 
11 
 
→ align with the latest EU acquis on market surveillance and on machinery.  
Chapter 2 - Freedom of movement for workers   
Serbia is moderately prepared in the freedom of movement for workers. Serbia made 
limited progress by simplifying the issuance of work and residence permits for foreigners 
and by continuing to improve electronic data exchange with Member States. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ continue to work on concluding additional agreements on social security coordination 
with EU Member States and develop IT infrastructures for the European Health Insurance 
Card (EHIC) and Electronic Exchange of Social Security Information (EESSI) purposes, as 
well as administrative capacities in view of joining the future EESSI Network; 
→ start preparations to join the European Labour Authority; 
→ start preparing for the alignment of national legislation with the EU acquis on free 
movement of workers – on access for EU citizens to the labour market and on equal 
treatment of EU citizens with nationals in the labour market. 
Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services 
Serbia is moderately prepared in these areas. Some progress was made, in particular 
following the adoption of the horizontal Law on services and the Law on postal services, 
which achieve further alignment with the EU acquis. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ further align its horizontal law on services with the EU Services Directive, advance 
harmonisation of sectoral laws with the horizontal law and the EU acquis, and create a 
portal for the point of single contact providing online information for service providers, 
including all relevant administrative procedures;  
→ finalise alignment with the EU acquis on postal services and implement the postal 
market rules;  
→ continue aligning with the EU acquis on the mutual recognition of professional 
qualifications, including the directives on the recognition of professional qualifications 
and on a proportionality test. 
Chapter 4: Free movement of capital 
Serbia is between a moderate and a good level of preparation on the free movement of 
capital. Some progress was made during the reporting period, in particular with the 
adoption of several amendments to the legal framework on anti-money laundering and 
counter-terrorism financing (AML/CFT) and implementing legislation on payment services, 
to align further with the EU acquis. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ liberalise capital movements in line with its obligations under the Stabilisation and 
Association Agreement (SAA), including by removing the remaining restrictions on the 
acquisition of agricultural land by EU nationals and by adopting amendments to the 
Law on the elements of property law relations to ensure equal treatment on the 
acquisition of property rights;  
 
12 
 
→ demonstrate greater effectiveness in monitoring, supervision, financial intelligence, 
investigation and reporting by building a track record of action in the field of AML/CFT. 
Chapter 6: Company law 
Serbia has a good level of preparation in company law. No progress was made during the 
reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ further align its legislation with the EU acquis on company law, particularly on takeover 
bids;  
→ align its legislation with the EU acquis on cross-border operations (conversions, mergers 
and divisions) and on the use of digital tools and processes in company law; 
→ further align its legislation on company reporting and transparency. 
Chapter 7: Intellectual property law 
Serbia has a good level of preparation in intellectual property rights (IPR). No progress was 
made in the reporting period.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ align the copyright and related rights legislation with the EU directives on collective 
rights management, on orphan works and on certain permitted uses of certain works and 
other subject matter protected by copyright and related rights for the benefit of persons 
who are blind, visually impaired or otherwise print-disabled;  
→ strengthen enforcement by improving capacities to handle IPR cases and improving 
coordination among different stakeholders. 
Chapter 8: Competition policy 
Serbia is moderately prepared in competition policy. In 2024, Serbia made limited progress 
by finalising the inventory of State aid schemes. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent, 
and therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ align the existing fiscal State aid schemes and work on aligning the Law on multilateral 
interchange fees and special operating rules for card-based payment transactions with 
the EU acquis and with obligations from the Stabilisation and Association Agreement 
(SAA); 
→ ensure that the notification and standstill obligations are systematically respected for 
all State aid measures and build a solid track record in implementing the laws on 
protection of competition and State aid control; 
→ in line with the Reform Agenda, finalise the action plan to align all existing schemes 
identified as being incompatible with SAA obligations.  
Chapter 9: Financial services 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of financial services. Some progress was made, 
particularly with the adoption of amendments to the Law on banks aiming to further align 
with the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR II), the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD 
V) and the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD). 
 
13 
 
   
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ continue to align the banking regulation with the latest versions of CRR/CRD and BRRD;  
→ continue to align with the EU acquis on insurance, including the Solvency II Directive; 
→ continue to align with the EU acquis on financial markets infrastructure and capital 
markets, including the Markets in Financial Instruments Regulation (MiFIR), the Directive 
on alternative investment fund managers (AIFMD) and the Directive relating to 
undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS). 
Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection 
Serbia is moderately prepared in consumer and health protection. Limited progress was 
made in implementing consumer protection legislation, notably by adopting the law on the 
protection of financial service consumers which is aimed to align with the EU acquis. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent, 
and therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should, in particular: 
 further align its legislation with the EU acquis on substances of human origin, on 
patients’ rights in cross-border healthcare, on tobacco control and on medicinal 
products for human and for veterinary use;  
→ amend the Law on health records and documentation to ensure that it fully complies 
with EU data protection requirements and with the EU acquis; 
→ further align with the EU acquis on consumer protection and general product safety. 
 
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH 
Chapter 10: Digital transformation and media 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the field of digital transformation and media. Some 
progress was made on digitalisation, with the adoption of the media laws and the 
transposition of the EU 5G Cybersecurity Toolbox. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Serbia should, in particular: 
→ further align its electronic communications, digital trust and cybersecurity legislation 
with the EU regulatory framework, including the Gigabit Infrastructure Act, eIDAS 2.0, the 
NIS2 Directive, and the Artificial Intelligence Act; 
→ ensure full financial and operational independence of the regulator for electronic media 
(REM) and the regulator for electronic communication and postal services (RATEL) in 
line with the EU acquis, including the EU Electronic Communications Code; 
→ fully implement the adopted media legislation, including with respect to the financial and 
functional independence of the Public Broadcasting Services and the REM Council, and 
further amend the media laws to align with the European Media Freedom Act, in an 
inclusive and transparent process. 
Chapter 16: Taxation 
Serbia is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of taxation. It 
made some progress in particular in aligning with the EU minimum excise duties on tobacco 
 
14 
 
and the amendments to the Value-Added Tax (VAT) Law introducing pre-filled VAT 
statements.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ continue implementing the Tax Administration transformation programme, in particular 
finalising the procurement and starting implementation of an integrated information 
system to support the Tax Administration’s new business model, and hire additional 
staff;  
→ further align its legislation with the EU acquis in the areas of VAT, excise duties and 
direct taxation; 
→ sign the Multilateral Competent Authority Agreement on automatic exchange of financial 
account information and commit to a date for first exchanges.   
Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy  
Serbia is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in economic and monetary 
policy. Some progress was made in 2024 by amending the Law on the National Bank of 
Serbia (NBS) and by improving, including on transparency, the 2025 budget law.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ fully align the legislation on the NBS with the EU acquis to ensure its full independence;  
→ further align the Budget System Law with Directive 85/2011 in the field of 
macroeconomic and fiscal projections, with a three-year spending timeframe and 
transparency, including for capital transfer and guarantees to SOEs, and accounting and 
statistical reporting.  
Chapter 19: Social policy and employment 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of social policy and employment. Serbia made no 
progress during the reporting period. Serbia needs to continue aligning its legislation with 
the EU acquis in the area of non-discrimination and equality, including also gender equality. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming period, Serbia should in particular: 
→ address the recommendations made in the previous functional reviews of the national 
employment service to ensure sufficient financial and institutional resources for 
employment and social policies, to systematically focus on supporting young people, 
women and the long-term unemployed, and continue implementing the Youth Guarantee 
pilot; 
→ launch consultations on the new labour law, including rules on foreign seconded workers 
in line with the EU acquis, and a new law on strike and further capacity building for social 
partners, and avoid further delays in implementing the action plan for Chapter 19, 
including aligning further with the EU acquis in the area of non-discrimination and 
equality in employment and social policy; 
→ adopt the delayed social protection strategy and amendments to the social welfare law 
to improve the coverage and adequacy of social benefits for people below the poverty 
threshold, including financial social assistance and child allowances, tackle the high 
caseload of social welfare centres, and address the recommendations made by the 
 
15 
 
European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) on the decision-making 
process of the Social Card and its impact on Roma and other vulnerable individuals. 
Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy 
Serbia is moderately prepared on enterprise and industrial policy. Limited progress was 
made, in particular with the adoption of five pieces of legislation to implement the Law on 
the governance of state-owned enterprises (SOEs). 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent, 
and therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ further improve the predictability of the business environment, in particular by 
substantially increasing the proportion of legislative acts opened for public 
consultation; 
→ in line with the Reform Agenda, adopt outstanding implementing legislation to ensure 
proper implementation of the SOE law; 
→ adopt a new action plan to continue the implementation of the industrial strategy and 
further increase resources for financial and technical support to SMEs.  
Chapter 25: Science and research 
Serbia has a good level of preparation in science and research. No progress was made in 
the reporting period. Although the action plan for the Smart Specialisation strategy and the 
strategy for the development of a start-up ecosystem continued to be implemented, this was 
overshadowed by negative developments affecting the autonomy of research institutes and 
universities.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ ensure the autonomy of research institutes and universities and the respect of academic 
freedom and freedom of scientific research, in line with the principles of the European 
Research Area; 
→ increase its national funding for research and innovation and continue implementing the 
Smart Specialisation Strategy; 
→ align its legislation with the European Research Infrastructure Consortium Regulation in 
line with the Reform Agenda. 
Chapter 26: Education and culture 
Serbia has a good level of preparation in education and culture. No progress was made 
overall in the reporting period. While some positive steps were taken, in particular by further 
consolidating the national qualifications framework system, the delivery of quality education 
was impacted by the discontinuity of education throughout the 2024/2025 school year, 
measures worsening the working conditions of teaching staff and dismissals and non-
renewals of contracts of a high number of teaching staff and principals at the start of the 
new school year. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ support children and young people, notably the most vulnerable, by bridging learning gaps 
during the school year 2024/2025, improve the working conditions of teaching staff and 
 
16 
 
ensure respect of academic freedom, in line with the principles of the European Higher 
Education Area and the Bologna Follow-up Group; 
→ increase the number of children attending early childhood education and care, in 
particular children from disadvantaged backgrounds; 
→ ensure that the policy and institutional framework for quality assurance in higher 
education fully complies with the recommendations of the European Association for 
Quality Assurance in Higher Education. 
Chapter 29: Customs union 
Serbia has a good level of preparation in the area of the customs union. It made limited 
progress, in particular with the adoption of amendments to existing legislation, including 
secondary legislation, with the aim of further alignment with the EU acquis, as well as partial 
operationalisation of the new risk analysis IT system RMS. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent, 
and therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ further upgrade the customs processing system by integrating risk management in all 
customs procedures;  
→ further develop the national customs IT system to enable interconnection and 
interoperability with the EU electronic customs environment; 
→ upgrade its national component of the New Computerised Transit System (NCTS) to 
Phase 6. 
 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY  
Chapter 14: Transport policy 
Serbia has a good level of preparation in this field. No progress was made during the 
reporting period.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Serbia, should in particular: 
→ adopt the national transport strategy in line with the new TEN-T Regulation requirements; 
improve the maintenance system for road and rail infrastructure; continue with alignment 
and simplification of road and rail border crossing procedures, including in the context of 
the EU-Western Balkans Green Lanes; and implement measures in the action plan for the 
national road safety strategy; 
→ ensure that procurement procedures for transport infrastructure projects follow the 
principles of transparency, equal treatment and open competition, while also 
strengthening the legal, technical, administrative, and institutional frameworks associated 
with those projects, including the establishment of fully independent quality control 
mechanisms; 
→ on rail reform, continue aligning legislation with the Fourth Railway Package and adopt 
the Law on Railways and the Law on Railway Safety; start addressing bottlenecks 
hindering the efficiency and quality of preparation and implementation of infrastructure 
investment projects. 
Chapter 15: Energy 
 
17 
 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of energy. Some progress was made on last year’s 
recommendations. Achievements include the certification of the Transportgas company, 
alignment with and commencement of implementation of the Electricity Integration 
Package, the issuance of the usage permit for the gas interconnector between Serbia and 
Bulgaria, and further alignment with the EU’s Renewable Energy Directive.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Serbia should, in particular: 
→  accelerate the implementation of the Electricity Integration Package, including 
determining net transmission capacities and allocating capacity on all cross-border 
interconnections, including on the bidding zone border between Transmission System 
Operators (TSOs) EMS and KOSTT; 
→  complete the unbundling of Srbijagas, ensure effective, non-discriminatory, and 
transparent third-party access at all gas entry points, and certify the Banatski Dvor 
underground gas storage facility in accordance with the Gas Storage Regulation; align 
with and implement the Gas Storage Regulation and Gas Security of Supply regulations, 
including the development of a risk assessment, preventive action plan and emergency 
plan;  
→  finalise and adopt the implementing legislation on the energy performance of buildings 
and set up the Just Transition governance process in line with the adopted Just 
Transition action plan. 
Chapter 21 - Trans-European networks   
Serbia is between a moderate and a good level of preparation in the area of trans-European 
networks. Overall, some progress has been made, including the commissioning and 
commercial operations of the Serbia-Bulgaria gas interconnector (IBS), as well as the start 
of works on Section III of the Trans-Balkan Electricity Corridor. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Serbia should, in particular: 
→ continue to improve transport and energy infrastructure connections, ensuring quality and 
transparency in line with EU standards; Serbia to transpose the revised TEN-E Regulation; 
→ continue the implementation of the Section III and project preparation for section IV of the 
Trans-Balkan Electricity Corridor between Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and 
Montenegro; continue project preparation for the Pannonian corridor that includes the 
line 400 kV Subotica-Sandorfalva;  
→ conclude project preparations and launch the procurement process for works to 
modernise the railway sections on Corridor X from Belgrade to Niš; accelerate 
implementation of the Niš-Dimitrovgrad railway line, including the Niš rail bypass; and 
complete the Niš-Brestovac railway section.  
Chapter 27 - Environment and climate change  
Serbia has some level of preparation in the area of environment and climate change. Some 
progress was made through improved legislation on Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA) and Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), the adoption of the law on air quality, 
implementation of Monitoring, Reporting, Verification and Accreditation (MRVA) legislation 
 
18 
 
covering stationary installations, the adoption of a waste prevention plan and adoption of 
legislation on hazard risk management.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Serbia should, in particular: 
→ implement measures set out in: (i) the action plan for administrative capacity 
development; (ii) the low carbon development strategy; (iii) the programme on air 
protection; and (iv) implement extended producers’ responsibility (EPR) system for 
specific waste streams, in accordance with the polluter pays principle;  
→ adopt legislation in line with the Environmental Crime Directive; adopt the environmental 
protection strategy; introduce a national carbon pricing mechanism and expand 
alignment with and implementation of MRVA acquis for the purpose of aligning with the 
EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) in its full scope;   
→ improve the policy dialogue with civil society organisations and ensure transparent 
public participation; ensure that infrastructure investments comply with the EU 
environmental and climate acquis and national and international nature and water 
obligations. 
 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION 
Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development 
Serbia has some level of preparation in agriculture and rural development. Limited progress 
was made with the rollover of entrusted IPARD measures. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should, in particular: 
→ urgently take measures to start implementation of IPARD III and avoid further losses of 
EU funds, notably by increasing capacity building, ensuring more efficient contracting 
and implementation of projects, and preparing new measures for entrustment as soon 
as possible; 
→ speed up the implementation of the action plan to align with the EU acquis in agriculture 
and rural development and adopt legislation relevant to agricultural markets, quality 
policy and organic farming; 
→ adopt a national strategy for agriculture and rural development. 
Chapter 12 - Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy  
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy. 
Limited progress was made during the reporting period following the adoption of two 
framework laws which aim to align with the EU acquis. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should, in particular: 
→ adopt the framework legislation on food safety, official controls, animal health, animal 
welfare, plant health and genetically modified organisms, aligned with the EU acquis; 
strengthen administrative capacity to ensure correct implementation; 
→ adopt and start implementing the national plan to align legislation with EU quality 
standards for raw milk; 
 
19 
 
→ prioritise the process of upgrading establishments producing food, feed and animal by-
products to meet EU structural standards. 
Chapter 13 - Fisheries and aquaculture 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of fisheries and aquaculture. Some progress was 
made during the reporting period, in particular with the adoption of the action plan for 
alignment with the EU acquis by the date of accession.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Serbia should, in particular: 
→ start implementing the action plan for alignment with the EU acquis, in particular on the 
organisation of markets, aquaculture, data collection, control measures and illegal, 
unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing;  
→  address the severe understaffing of the authorities responsible for developing policy and 
anti-fraud controls for fisheries (including border controls). 
Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of regional policy and the coordination of 
structural instruments. It made limited progress, notably by increasing its administrative 
capacity and improving programming. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent, 
and therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ put in place a national plan to promote regional development and effectively address 
regional disparities, and build a resilient ecosystem involving all levels of government 
and relevant non-state bodies, in line with the partnership principle;  
→ advance the public administration reforms in a coordinated manner, implementing 
effectively its local-self-government component, through the necessary financial and 
fiscal decentralisation; 
→ strengthen further the financial management and control systems and the capacity for 
indirect management of EU funds by adopting a comprehensive staff retention policy and 
tackling the issue of understaffing in critical functions and in the institutions that 
manage EU funds.  
Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions 
Serbia has some level of preparation in the area of financial and budgetary provisions. No 
progress was made over the reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular:  
→ develop organisational and procedural links between the institutions involved in the own 
resources system;  
→ continue preparations to meet the specific administrative conditions for own resources, 
as laid down in the EU own resources regulations, including by drafting an action plan 
with a  timeline to meet the administrative conditions. 
 
CLUSTER 6: EXTERNAL RELATIONS  
 
20 
 
Chapter 30: External relations 
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of external relations. No progress was made as 
Serbia temporarily introduced a number of trade restrictive measures that were not in line 
with the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA).  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to a limited extent 
and therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ refrain from adopting new trade restrictive measures; 
→ adopt a WTO-compliant law on genetically modified organisms to move forward in the 
remaining negotiations on bilateral market access and finalise its accession to the WTO;  
→ continue to implement the actions set out in the new common regional market action 
plan for 2025-2028 and implement the nine decisions adopted in the context of the 
Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) in October 2024 and the four decisions 
adopted in February 2025.  
Chapter 31 - Foreign, security and defence policy  
Serbia is moderately prepared in the area of EU common foreign, security and defence 
policy. Overall, it made limited progress over the reporting period. While alignment patterns 
remained largely unchanged, Serbia aligned retroactively with several Council decisions and 
EU statements, including some decisions listing Russian citizens and statements 
condemning Russia’s actions . Still, some of Serbia’s actions and statements went against 
key EU foreign policy positions, especially on the Russian Federation. High-level and 
frequent bilateral contacts with Russia intensified, including attendance at the 9 May 
Russian military parade, combined with recurrent anti-Western narratives, raising further 
questions about Serbia’s strategic direction. Serbia’s Free Trade Agreement with China 
entered into force on 1 July 2024, posing a strategic concern. Serbia has not aligned with the 
EU sanctions on Russia’s war of aggression on Ukraine, however, Serbia continued 
cooperating with the EU on countering sanctions circumvention and providing support to 
Ukraine. Serbia continued to participate in and contribute substantially to EU crisis 
management missions and operations under the EU’s common security and defence policy. 
The recommendations issued in 2024 were implemented to a limited extent and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Serbia should in particular: 
→ improve, as a matter of priority, its alignment with EU common foreign and security 
policy (CFSP), including restrictive measures, and avoid actions and statements that go 
against EU foreign policy positions; 
→ make credible efforts to close the space for foreign information manipulation and 
interference (FIMI), including disinformation, and take action to build societal resilience 
against it and other forms of hybrid threats; 
→ continue to take action to prevent any attempt to use the territory of Serbia or legal 
bodies registered in Serbia to circumvent EU restrictive measures.