1.1 CONTEXT  
Since the opening of Serbia’s accession negotiations in January 2014, 22 out of 35 chapters 
have been opened, including all chapters in cluster 1 on the fundamentals and all chapters in 
cluster 4 on the Green agenda and sustainable connectivity. Two chapters have provisionally 
been closed. In June 2021, Serbia accepted the revised enlargement methodology. The overall 
pace of negotiations will continue to depend, in particular, on the pace of rule of law reforms 
and on the normalisation of Serbia’s relations with Kosovo. 
Serbia continued to implement the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) between 
Serbia and the EU. 
The Serbian government has continued to declare EU membership its strategic goal. The 
previous government acted in a caretaker capacity with limited powers between February 2022 
and late October 2022 when the new government was formed. This had an impact on the pace 
of reforms in 2022, which picked up again in 2023. Political developments following the two 
tragic mass shootings in early May 2023, which resulted in 19 dead, including nine 
schoolchildren, the ensuing protests, and speculations about snap parliamentary elections led 
to a shift in the reform priorities.  
The EU-facilitated Dialogue on normalisation of relations between Kosovo and Serbia 
continued in the reporting period with regular meetings on the level of Chief Negotiators and 
Leaders. After months of intense negotiations and with the support of key partners, the Parties 
reached an Agreement on the Path to Normalisation in Brussels on 27 February 2023, and 
agreed on its Implementation Annex in Ohrid, North Macedonia, on 18 March 2023. Both 
Kosovo and Serbia are yet to start implementation of their respective obligations stemming 
from the Agreement, which are valid and binding for the Parties and part of their European 
paths.  
The Commission’s recommendations from its 2021 s, that Serbia has fulfilled 
the opening benchmarks for cluster 3 (competitiveness and inclusive growth) and that this 
cluster is technically ready for opening, remain valid. 
Following Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, Serbia aligned with some EU positions 
in international forums (including in the UN General Assembly). However, it has continued 
not to align with any restrictive measures against the Russian Federation and has not aligned 
with the majority of High Representative statements on this matter. It maintained high-level 
relations with the Russian Federation, raising questions about Serbia’s strategic direction. 
Under the EU-Serbia negotiating framework, Serbia is expected to progressively align its 
policies towards third countries with the policies and positions adopted by the EU, including 
restrictive measures. 
It remains important that effective policy planning and coordination is in place, along with 
sufficient human and financial resources for EU accession across all institutions involved, so 
that Serbia can work towards meeting its objectives for EU accession negotiations. In line with 
the EU accession objective, and as a matter of priority, the Serbian authorities need to take 
responsibility for proactive and objective communication on the EU, which is by far Serbia’s 
main political and economic partner. 
 
 This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is line with UNSCR 1244/1999 and the ICJ 
Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence. 
 
4

* * *

1.2 SUMMARY OF THE REPORT1 
As regards the political criteria, the Parliament constituted in August 2022 includes the 
opposition parties that boycotted the 2020 elections. However, political polarisation remained 
in evidence and has further deepened following the tragic mass shootings in early May. A 
number of peaceful mass citizens’ protests - Serbia against violence - have taken place – with 
support from several opposition parties. 
No elections took place during the reporting period. Serbia still needs to address a number of 
long-standing recommendations by the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights 
at the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE/ODIHR) and Council of 
Europe bodies concerning the electoral framework. 
Debates in Parliament were marked by tensions between the ruling majority coalition and the 
opposition. The Parliament has no annual work plan and most of its sessions were called with 
the minimum advance notice of 24 hours, which should only be used in exceptional 
circumstances. The code of conduct was not systematically applied and the frequent use of 
inflammatory language was not penalised. Sanctions and fines were only issued to opposition 
MPs. Parliamentary Rules of Procedure need to be modernised, and the code of conduct applied 
to address offences by Members of Parliament. All but two political groups engaged 
constructively with the European Parliament in the follow-up to the Inter-Party Dialogue and 
its transition into a new Parliamentary Dialogue Process. 
Further efforts are needed to ensure systematic and genuine cooperation between the 
government and civil society. An enabling environment for establishing, running and financing 
civil society organisations still needs to be created on the ground, as verbal attacks and smear 
campaigns against such organisations continued, including by high-level officials. 
Serbia is moderately prepared as regards public administration reform. Overall, limited 
progress was made in this area, notably through the continued development of e-services, 
implementation of the e-government policy, and further roll-out of training courses for civil 
servants. On human resources management, more than half of senior manager positions are 
filled on an acting basis. As regards policy development and coordination, no mechanism is 
yet in place to verify that the Public Policy Secretariat’s comments have been incorporated into 
the final draft versions of laws and policy documents submitted for government approval. On 
public financial management, action is still needed to fully implement the recommendation for 
a single mechanism for prioritising all investments regardless of type and source of financing. 
Serbia has some level of preparation when it comes to its judicial system. Overall,  some 
progress was made during the reporting period. Serbia took an important step towards 
strengthening the independence and accountability of the judiciary with the timely adoption of 
most of the implementing legislation giving practical effect to the 2022 constitutional 
amendments, while two of the implementing laws still need to be adopted: the Law on Judicial 
Academy and the Law on Seats and Territorial Jurisdiction of Courts. The Venice Commission 
issued three opinions that overall assessed positively the adopted implementing legislation and 
recognised the transparency and inclusiveness of the process. Most of its recommendations 
 
1This report covers the period from June 2022 to June 2023. It is based on input from a variety of sources, including 
contributions from the government of Serbia, the EU Member States, European Parliament reports and 
information from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also includes the results of 
comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of law. 
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of preparation, 
moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made during the reporting 
period, it uses the following scale has been used: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, good 
progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been used. 
 
5 
 
were addressed. Relevant by-laws will need to be adopted by May 2024. The High Judicial 
Council (HJC) and High Prosecutorial Council (HPC) were established on 8 May, following 
the election of the lay members, which gave practical effect to the implementing legislation. 
Serbia has some level of preparation in the fight against corruption. Overall, limited progress 
was made during the reporting period, including on last year’s recommendations. Steps have 
been taken that aimed at further implementing the recommendations of the Council of Europe’s 
Group of States against Corruption (GRECO) in the area of prevention of corruption. There 
was a slight increase in the number of new investigations and final convictions in high-level 
corruption cases, but the number of new indictments fell. There were no cases of final 
confiscation of assets, for which a track record is required. Serbia still needs to adopt  a national 
anti-corruption strategy and the accompanying action plan. Serbia presented to the European 
Commission a draft strategy for the period 2021-2028 accompanied by a first action plan for 
the period 2023-2024. A majority of anti-corruption related interim benchmarks for Chapter 
23 and a majority of GRECO recommendations from the 4th and 5th rounds of evaluation have 
been included in the documents. However, there is still a need to ensure the inclusion of 
remaining Chapter 23 interim benchmarks and outstanding GRECO recommendations and to 
create the necessary conditions for implementation. Serbia should establish an effective 
coordination mechanism to operationalise prevention and repression policy goals and 
thoroughly address corruption. Those sectors most vulnerable to corruption require dedicated 
action. Overall, corruption is prevalent in many areas and remains an issue of concern. There 
is a need for strong political will to effectively address corruption issues, and a robust criminal 
justice response to high-level corruption. 
In the fight against organised crime, Serbia has some level of preparation. Limited progress 
was made in addressing last year’s recommendations, in particular on detection and prevention 
of migrant smuggling and trafficking in human beings. A slight increase in financial 
investigations and confiscation of assets can also be noted in 2022. The number of new 
investigations and indictments increased; first instance and final convictions (in particular 
money laundering) decreased. Extended confiscation is not systematically applied. Proactive 
criminal investigations and the systematic tracking of money flows, especially in cases of 
inexplicable wealth, are still not common practice. However, the understanding and the 
investigation approach has improved and police, prosecutors and criminal judges are aware of 
the importance of consistently applying a ‘follow the money to find the crime’ approach and 
using circumstantial evidence. Serbia is late in conducting an analysis of the roles and practices 
of security services and of the National Security Council in carrying out criminal investigations 
relating to serious and organised crime, although preparatory works have started. There is well-
established cooperation with CEPOL, Eurojust, Europol and INTERPOL, notably on weapons 
trafficking, drugs trafficking, and the fight against high-profile organised crime groups. Serbia 
needs to further increase the technical, financial and human resources capacity of the 
Prosecutor’s Office for Organised Crime to perform its duties in an independent manner 
(including premises to accommodate new staff). Serbia should adapt its approach from one 
based on individual cases to a strategy against criminal organisations, and from focusing on 
cases of low or medium importance to high-profile cases, with the aim to dismantle big and 
international organisations and seizing assets. 
Serbia’s legislative and institutional framework for upholding fundamental rights is broadly 
in place. The Ombudsman was re-elected in April 2023, without cross-party support. The 
Ombudsman’s Office has yet to be provided with additional resources to cover its new powers 
laid down in the Ombudsman Law of 2021. The recruitment of additional staff for the 
Commissioner for Information of Public Importance and Personal Data Protection is 
 
6 
 
significantly delayed. The procedure for executing the decisions of the European Court of 
Human Rights, including the role of Serbia’s Government Agent before the Court, needs to be 
further regulated. Implementation of the new strategies and action plans on gender equality, 
anti-discrimination and Roma2 inclusion started, although monitoring bodies were not in place 
for most of the reporting period due to elections and formation of the new government. Action 
plans and related funding as regards violence against women and deinstitutionalisation are 
significantly delayed. New national minority councils were constituted following the elections 
held in November 2022. Serbia continued drafting and conducting consultations on a new 
‘action plan for the realisation of the rights of national minorities’. 
Regarding freedom of expression, limited progress was made in the reporting period. The 
police and the prosecution services reacted swiftly to several cases of attacks and threats, 
working with the standing working group on the safety of journalists. However, cases of 
threats, intimidation, hate speech and violence against journalists remain a concern, as is the 
increase of strategic lawsuits against public participation (SLAPP), notably launched by 
members of national and local authorities, that may produce a chilling effect including self-
censorship. Recurrent statements by high-level officials on the daily and investigative work of 
journalists provide for a challenging environment for the exercise of freedom of expression. 
The possibility of journalists to report on ongoing criminal proceedings is excessively limited 
in the legal framework. 
Serbia continued implementing the action plan of the media strategy. After increasing delays, 
several processes were relaunched after the formation of the new government in October 2022. 
Consultations resumed in November 2022 on amending the Law on public information and 
media. Following public consultations, consultations with media associations and hurried 
consultations with the European Commission amendments were adopted to the laws on public 
information and media and on electronic media before the dissolution of parliament in October 
2023. Overall, the new laws will strengthen the independence of the regulatory body for 
electronic media (REM). They also codify the role of the Press Council and render the process 
of public co-funding more transparent and accessible. In the context of elections, the ban on 
media coverage of officials who are also candidates taking part in official gatherings organised 
for the opening of infrastructure or other facilities was extended to 30 days, which is an 
improvement of the current situation. However, the legislative process was not finalised fully 
in line with the EU acquis and European standards. The ownership of media by state-owned 
enterprises was prominent in deliberations.  An important step was taken with respect to the 
application of criteria aligned with the EU acquis to the assessment of state aid, while it should 
be clarified that antitrust and merger control rules apply to the media sector and safeguards to 
protect media pluralism and editorial independence remain to be improved.  The 
implementation of such safeguards needs to be closely monitored in practice. In August 2022, 
REM published a call for the allocation of a fifth media service licence with national frequency, 
which has still not been awarded, without credible justification. Political and economic 
influence on the media remains a source of concern. Serbia needs to take urgent action to 
counter anti-EU narratives propagated by numerous media outlets, and to counter foreign 
information manipulation and interference, most notably in the context of Russia’s war of 
aggression against Ukraine. 
On the economic criteria, Serbia is at a good level of preparation and has made some progress 
in developing a functioning market economy. After a strong rebound in 2021 from the 
 
2 In line with the terminology of European institutions the umbrella term ‘Roma’ is used here to refer to a 
number of different groups, without denying the specificities of these groups. 
 
7 
 
contraction induced by COVID-19, the Serbian economy decelerated substantially in 2022, 
impacted by the economic fallout from Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, in 
particular as regards rising inflation via soaring energy and food prices. Consumer price 
inflation surged in 2022 and continued to rise in early 2023, which led the central bank to 
steadily tighten its policy stance. Progress has also been made as regards the adoption of new 
fiscal rules. Banking sector stability was maintained and lending growth decelerated 
substantially. High inflation helped improve the budget balance in 2022, despite substantial 
capital transfers to state-owned energy utilities and further ad hoc support measures. Major 
structural reforms of public administration and of the governance of state-owned enterprises 
continued to advance slowly. The state retains a strong footprint in the economy; the private 
sector is underdeveloped and hampered by weaknesses in the rule of law, in particular 
corruption and judicial inefficiency, and in the enforcement of fair competition. 
Serbia is moderately prepared and has made some progress in coping with competitive 
pressure and market forces within the EU. The structure of the economy improved further 
and economic integration with the EU remained high. However, the quality and relevance of 
education and training still does not fully meet labour market needs. Public investment 
remained at a high level with the aim to address serious infrastructure gaps after years of 
underinvestment. Small and medium-sized enterprises still face a number of challenges, 
including an uneven playing field as compared with large companies and foreign investors. 
On good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation, Serbia remained committed 
overall to maintaining good bilateral relations with other candidate countries, potential 
candidates and neighbouring EU Member States. Relations with Croatia improved. Relations 
with Hungary have further intensified. In general, Serbia actively participates in regional 
cooperation. 
Overall, Serbia has remained engaged in the EU-facilitated Dialogue on the normalisation of 
relations with Kosovo, but it needs to demonstrate more serious commitment, invest more 
efforts and make compromises to take the process of normalisation of relations with Kosovo 
forward. Serbia needs to uphold its Dialogue commitments and commit to the full 
implementation of all past Dialogue agreements and the Agreement on the Path to 
Normalisation and its Implementation Annex. Serbia and Kosovo are expected to engage more 
constructively to enable negotiations on the comprehensive legally binding normalisation 
Agreement to start and show flexibility in order to make rapid and concrete progress. 
Normalisation of relations is an essential condition on the European path of both Parties and 
both risk losing important opportunities in the absence of progress. 
The relationship with Kosovo has been affected by several crises of varying intensity on a 
number of issues, with a violent attack in the north of Kosovo against Kosovo Police on 24 
September 2023, constituting the gravest escalation in recent years. Huge quantities of small 
arms and light weapons (SALW) were found in the context of this attack3.  The EU expects the 
perpetrators to be apprehended and swiftly brought to justice and Serbia to fully cooperate and 
take all the necessary steps in this regard. Other crises during the reporting period were 
triggered by issues over the freedom of movement, in particular licence plates, following the 
Kosovo government’s decision on 29 June 2022 to enforce the re-registration of all vehicles 
with Kosovo-issued licence plates. This led to the tensions in July 2022 and continued through 
the erection of roadblocks and the collective resignation of Kosovo Serbs from Kosovo 
institutions in November 2022. Following the withdrawal of Kosovo Serbs from Kosovo 
 
3 The EU and Western Balkan partners agreed in May 2023 to prolong beyond 2024 the Roadmap for a 
comprehensive small arms and light weapons control in the Western Balkans. 
 
8 
 
institutions, local by-elections were organised in the four municipalities in the north of Kosovo. 
Scheduled initially for December 2022 and then postponed to 23 April 2023, the mayoral and 
municipal by-elections were held in line with the legal framework of Kosovo and efforts were 
made for them to take place in a smooth and orderly manner. However, despite the milestone 
Agreement on the path to normalisation reached in Brussels on 27 February and its 
Implementation Annex agreed in Ohrid, North Macedonia, on 18 March 2023, and despite 
Kosovo extending the deadline for the registration of candidatures for the local by-elections, 
not all parties and communities made use of their democratic right to participate and vote. The 
very low turnout (3.47% of voters), following the boycott by the Kosovo Serb community, 
showed that these elections do not offer a long-term political solution for these municipalities. 
The violence perpetrated against KFOR troops during protests against these mayors’ taking 
office in the municipalities has to be fully investigated by Serbia. It remains imperative to 
restore a situation where Kosovo Serbs participate actively in local governance, policing and 
the judiciary in the north of Kosovo. Early local elections need to be held as soon as possible 
in all four municipalities, organised in a fully inclusive manner, and with the unconditional 
participation of Kosovo Serbs. 
Regarding Serbia’s ability to assume the obligations of EU membership, the country 
continued the work on alignment with the EU acquis in several areas. 
The internal market cluster is key for Serbia’s preparations for the requirements of the EU 
internal market and is of high relevance for early integration and the development of the 
Common Regional Market. Progress was limited in most areas within the cluster. No progress 
was registered in the area of free movement of capital. 
The competitiveness and inclusive growth cluster has significant links to Serbia’s Economic 
Reform Programme and is technically ready to be opened. Serbia continued to make progress 
in all areas under this cluster, particularly through further legislative alignment with the EU 
acquis as well as with a new law on the management of state-owned enterprises.  
The Green agenda and sustainable connectivity cluster is at the heart of the Green Agenda 
for the Western Balkans4 and closely linked to Serbia’s Economic Reform Programme and the 
Commission’s Economic and Investment Plan5. Some progress was achieved in particular on 
Trans-European networks, where Serbia advanced on upgrading its infrastructure, with works 
progressing on the Serbia-Bulgaria gas interconnector, and on climate change, with the 
adoption of the Low Carbon Development Strategy 2023-2030. 
The cluster on resources, agriculture and cohesion comprises policies linked to EU structural 
funds and to developing capacity to assume the responsibilities of a future Member State. It 
also comprises some of the key policy areas crucial for ensuring sustainable food systems and 
helping rural communities to develop and diversify economically. Limited progress was 
achieved in some areas, such as on classification of food establishments and establishments 
handling animal by-products, and the recruitment of additional staff in the Plant Health 
Directorate; financial and budgetary provisions as regards the underlying policy areas affecting 
the correct functioning of the own resources system; and the institutional framework for 
cohesion policy. 
On the external relations cluster, Serbia is yet to finalise its accession to the World Trade 
Organisation which is one of the opening benchmarks for Chapter 30. Serbia should also 
abstain from introducing unilateral trade-restrictive measures without prior consultation of the 
Commission, in line with its obligations under the Stabilisation and Association Agreement. 
 
4SWD(2020) 223 final. 
5COM(2020) 641 final. 
 
9 
 
Serbia continued not to align with EU restrictive measures against Russia and the majority of 
declarations by the High Representative on behalf of the EU on this matter. Serbia’s alignment 
rate with relevant High Representative statements on behalf of the EU and Council Decisions 
was at 46% in 2022 and 51 % in August 2023; some actions and statements by Serbia went 
against EU foreign policy positions. Serbia is expected to improve, as a matter of priority, its 
alignment with the EU Common Foreign and Security Policy, including with EU restrictive 
measures, and refrain from actions that go against EU positions on foreign policy. 
On migration, Serbia contributed to the management of the mixed migration flows towards 
the EU and cooperated with the EU, EU Member States and its neighbours to implement the 
EU Action Plan on the Western Balkans presented by the Commission in December 2022. 
Additional progress along all the pillars of the Action Plan is expected.  Efforts continued, with 
EU support, to host and accommodate substantial numbers of third-country nationals. Serbia 
extended for one more year, until March 2024, temporary protection to Ukrainian nationals 
having fled Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine. Serbia continued to implement the EU-
Serbia readmission agreement and to carry out border control and surveillance. Implementation 
of the new integrated border management strategy for 2022-2027, with its 2022-2024 action 
plan, is delayed. Access to and provision of information regarding the asylum procedure has 
yet to be improved, in particular at the airports in Nis and Kragujevac. Serbia made substantial 
progress to align with EU visa policy by reinstating visa requirements for six third countries. 
Serbia needs to further align with EU visa policy as set out in the Commission’s sixth report 
under the visa suspension mechanism of October 20236. Following the concerns raised by the 
EU the Government has withdrawn the proposed amendments to the Law on citizenship, which 
would have provided the possibility to apply for Serbian citizenship after only a short period 
of residence and work. 
 
 
6 COM(2023) 730 final.