3 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1. 
CONTEXT 
Türkiye1 remains a key partner for the European Union and a candidate country. Türkiye has 
been linked to the EU by an Association Agreement since 1964 and a Customs Union was 
established in 1995. The European Council granted Türkiye the status of candidate country in 
December 1999 and accession negotiations were opened in October 2005. Within the framework 
of accession negotiations, 16 chapters have been opened and one of these was provisionally 
closed. The General Affairs Council conclusions of December 2021 reiterated the Council’s 
position of June 2018 that under the current circumstances, Türkiye’s accession negotiations 
have effectively come to a standstill, and no further chapters can be considered for opening or 
closing2. Over the reporting period, the Turkish government has not reversed the negative trend 
in relation to reform, despite its repeated commitment to EU accession. The EU’s serious 
concerns on the continued deterioration of democracy, the rule of law, fundamental rights and 
the independence of the judiciary have not been addressed. There was further backsliding in 
many areas. Concerns increased over economic governance and the good functioning of the 
market economy. 
After some positive developments in 2021, relations with the EU deteriorated in the first half of 
2022, due to repeated violations of Greek airspace by Turkish fighter jets in the Aegean and 
threatening Turkish statements regarding the sovereignty of Greek islands, and against Cyprus. 
In addition, Türkiye continued to carry out military exercises in the maritime zones of Cyprus, 
and Turkish warships illegally obstructed survey activities in the Cypriot Exclusive Economic 
Zone (EEZ). Despite international condemnation, Türkiye continued with its plan to open the 
fenced-off area of Varosha. Tensions in the Aegean Sea and Eastern Mediterranean were not 
conducive to good neighbourly relations and undermined regional stability and security. 
The EU, most recently at the European Council of June 2022, has repeatedly urged Türkiye to 
avoid making any kind of threat, creating any source of friction or carrying out any action that 
damages good neighbourly relations and the peaceful settlement of disputes. The EU has re-
affirmed that it has a strategic interest in a stable and secure environment in the Eastern 
Mediterranean and in developing a cooperative and mutually beneficial relationship with 
Türkiye. 
The EU and Türkiye continued high-level engagement in areas of common interest such as 
climate, health or migration and security. This was in line with the EU’s offer to support a more 
positive dynamic in EU-Türkiye relations, expressing readiness to engage with Türkiye in a 
phased, proportionate and reversible manner in a number of areas of common interest, subject to 
the conditions set out by the European Council. On energy, Türkiye continues to be an important 
and reliable transit country for the EU. 
Türkiye continued its remarkable efforts to host one of the largest refugee populations worldwide 
with around 3.6 million Syrians under temporary protection and more than 330 000 non-Syrians, 
including those who hold or have applied for international protection status. The EU Facility for 
                                                            
1 In line with the request of the Republic of Türkiye regarding the use of the country's new official name in English, 
this document uses the name “Türkiye” instead of “Turkey” in English. This administrative change is limited to the 
nomenclature used in EU documents, does not have a retroactive effect, and entails no legal consequences. This 
approach is without prejudice to the nomenclature used by Member States. 
2 The European Council conclusions of December 2006 remain in force. 
 
4 
 
Refugees in Turkey supported this work, with over EUR 4.7 billion of the EUR 6 billion 
operational budget of the Facility already having been disbursed by June 2022. The Commission 
allocated an additional package of EUR 3.5 billion covering the 2020-2023 period to ensure the 
continuation of support provided to date, in particular in key areas such as basic needs, 
healthcare and education, and protection and socio-economic support. 
The March 2016 EU-Turkey Statement continued to yield results and remained the key 
framework governing cooperation on migration despite Türkiye’s calls to update the Statement. 
Although the resettlement of refugees in EU Member States resumed after a short break, due to 
the pandemic, Türkiye maintained the suspension of returns from the Greek islands that it put in 
place in March 2020. 
By June 2022, Türkiye had experienced over 15 million COVID-19 cases, with almost 100 000 
deaths. The country saw two waves of the pandemic in 2021 and a sharp increase in case 
numbers was observed in February 2022, with the emergence of the Omicron variant. The 
number of COVID-19 cases has been decreasing since then, but started to increase again towards 
the end of the reporting period. The two-dose vaccination coverage is 64% of the total 
population. In August 2021, the Commission adopted an equivalence decision, confirming 
Türkiye’s participation in the EU Digital Green Certificate scheme, which connects the country’s 
vaccination certification scheme to the EU’s system. COVID-19 vaccination certificates issued 
by Türkiye are accepted in the EU under the same conditions as the EU Digital COVID 
Certificate. At the same time, Türkiye agreed to accept the EU Digital COVID Certificate for 
travel from the EU to Türkiye. 
1.2. SUMMARY OF THE REPORT3 
There are serious deficiencies in the functioning of Türkiye’s democratic institutions. During 
the reporting period, democratic backsliding continued. Structural deficiencies in the presidential 
system remained in place. Key recommendations from the Council of Europe and its bodies have 
yet to be addressed. Parliament continued to lack the necessary means to hold the government 
accountable. The constitutional architecture continued to centralise powers at the level of the 
Presidency without ensuring the sound and effective separation of powers between the executive, 
legislative and the judiciary. In the absence of an effective checks and balances mechanism, the 
democratic accountability of the executive branch continues to be limited to elections. 
Despite the lifting of the state of emergency in July 2018, some legal provisions granting 
government officials extraordinary powers and retaining several of the restrictive elements of the 
state of emergency remained in place. The State of Emergency Inquiry Commission has yet to 
complete the examination of its caseload in relation to the public employees who were dismissed 
by decree-laws during the period of emergency rule. In July 2021, Türkiye’s Parliament adopted 
a bill that extends the duration of some of the restrictive elements of the state of emergency for 
one more year. 
                                                            
3 This report covers the period from June 2021 to June 2022. It is based on input from a variety of sources, including 
contributions from the government of Türkiye, the EU Member States, European Parliament reports and information 
from various international and non-governmental organisations. This also includes the results of comparative 
assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of law. 
The report uses the following assessment scales to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of preparation, 
moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made during the reporting 
period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, good progress and very 
good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been used. 
 
5 
 
The judiciary continued to systematically target members of the opposition parties in Parliament, 
in relation to alleged terrorism-related offences. The legal framework for elections and political 
parties remains problematic. The electoral threshold was lowered from 10% to 7%. Türkiye has 
not yet addressed the remaining recommendations by the OSCE Office for Democratic 
Institutions and Human Rights and the Venice Commission. 
Pressure on mayors from opposition parties by the ruling coalition government further weakened 
local democracy. Mayors from the opposition parties faced administrative and judicial 
investigations. Local democracy in the south-east remained severely hampered. In the south-east, 
the forcibly dismissed mayors continued to be replaced by government-appointed trustees. 
The situation in the south-east remained very worrying. In October 2021, Türkiye’s Parliament 
extended the military’s mandate to launch cross-border anti-terror operations in Syria and Iraq by 
two additional years. The Turkish government continued its domestic and cross-border security 
and military operations in Iraq and Syria. The security situation remained precarious in border 
areas with recurrent terrorist acts committed by the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), which 
remains on the EU list of persons, groups and entities involved in acts of terrorism. The EU 
unambiguously condemned the PKK’s attacks and expressed solidarity with the families of the 
victims. The government has a legitimate right and a responsibility to fight terrorism, but it is 
essential that it does so in accordance with the rule of law, human rights and fundamental 
freedoms. Anti-terror measures need to be proportionate. There were no developments on the 
resumption of a credible political peace process to achieve a sustainable solution. 
Serious backsliding regarding civil society issues continued. Civil society organisations faced 
increased pressure and their space to operate freely continued to reduce, limiting their freedoms 
of expression, association and assembly. The implementation of the law on preventing financing 
of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction added further restrictions on civil society 
organisations. 
Civilian oversight of the security forces has not been consolidated. Military, police and 
intelligence services’ accountability remained very limited. Parliamentary oversight of the 
security institutions needs to be strengthened. In July, the Parliament extended the retirement age 
of the Chief of General Staff from 67 to 72 allowing the incumbent Chief of General Staff to 
serve an additional year while the air and navy commanders have retired. 
Türkiye has some level of preparation/is moderately prepared in the field of public 
administration reform. No progress was made during the reporting period. The country 
continues to lack a comprehensive reform agenda for public administration and public financial 
management and the government has not started any comprehensive reform of public 
administration. The administration's accountability is insufficient, and its human resources 
management needs to be improved. Policy-making lacks evidence-based methods and 
participatory mechanisms. The politicisation of the administration continued. Women’s 
representation in civil service managerial posts remained low. 
Türkiye’s judicial system is at an early stage of preparation. The serious backsliding observed 
since 2016 continued during the reporting period. Concerns remained, in particular over the 
systemic lack of independence of the judiciary and undue pressure on judges and prosecutors. 
Particular concerns relating to the judiciary’s adherence to international and European standards 
increased, in particular in relation to the refusal to implement rulings by the European Court of 
Human Rights. Implementation of the 2021 human rights action plan and the 2019 judicial 
 
6 
 
reform strategy continued. However, both documents failed to address major shortcomings in the 
Turkish judiciary, lacking a plan for significant improvements to the overall functioning of the 
country’s judicial system. Only 515 judges or prosecutors dismissed following the coup attempt 
were reinstated, despite several being acquitted. The lack of objective, merit-based, standardised 
and pre-established criteria for recruiting and promoting judges and prosecutors remains a source 
of concern. 
Regarding the fight against corruption, Türkiye remained at an early stage of preparations and 
made no progress in the reporting period. The country has not set up anti-corruption bodies in 
line with its international obligations. The legal framework and institutional architecture need to 
be improved to limit political and undue influence in the prosecution and adjudication of 
corruption cases. The accountability and transparency of public institutions need to be improved. 
The absence of an anti-corruption strategy and action plan indicated a lack of will to decisively 
fight corruption. Most of the Council of Europe’s Group of States against Corruption (GRECO) 
recommendations have not been implemented. Overall, corruption is widespread and remains an 
issue of concern. 
Türkiye has some level of preparation in the fight against organised crime, however there was 
limited progress overall. The completion of an international agreement on the exchange of 
personal data between Europol and the Turkish authorities responsible for fighting serious crime 
and terrorism is still pending, as Turkish data protection legislation is not yet in line with the EU 
acquis. The legal framework regulating the fight against money laundering and terrorist 
financing needs to be improved in line with recommendations by the Financial Action Task 
Force (FATF) and those by the Venice Commission on the law on preventing financing of 
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. 
The deterioration of human and fundamental rights continued. Many of the measures 
introduced during the state of emergency remain in force. The legal framework includes general 
guarantees of respect for human and fundamental rights, but the legislation and its 
implementation need to be brought into line with the European Convention on Human Rights 
(ECHR) and the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) case-law. The Council of Europe’s 
Parliamentary Assembly continued to monitor Türkiye’s respect for human rights, democracy 
and the rule of law. Türkiye’s continued refusal to implement certain ECtHR rulings, notably in 
the cases of Selahattin Demirtaş and Osman Kavala, is a source of serious concern regarding the 
judiciary’s adherence to international and European standards and Türkiye’s commitment to 
promote the rule of law and respect for fundamental rights. The infringement procedure started 
by the Council of Europe against Türkiye in February 2022, for non-implementation of the 
judgment in the Kavala case has marked yet another benchmark of Türkiye’s drifting away from 
the standards for human rights and fundamental freedoms that it has subscribed to as a member 
of the Council of Europe. In July, the Court ruled that Türkiye has failed to implement the 2019 
ECtHR judgment on the Kavala case.  
The human rights action plan adopted in 2021 continued to be implemented, but this does not 
address critical issues and has not led to an improvement in the overall human rights situation. 
On freedom of expression, the serious backsliding observed in recent years continued. The 
implementation of criminal laws relating to national security and anti-terrorism continued to 
contravene the ECHR and other international standards and to diverge from the case-law of the 
ECtHR. Restrictive measures implemented by state institutions and increasing pressure with 
 
7 
 
judicial and administrative means continued to undermine the exercise of freedom of expression. 
There continued to be criminal cases brought against and convictions of journalists, human rights 
defenders, lawyers, writers, opposition politicians, students, artists and social media users. 
There was further backsliding in the area of freedom of assembly and association. There were 
recurrent bans, disproportionate use of force and interventions in peaceful demonstrations; 
investigations, court cases and administrative fines against demonstrators on charges of 
terrorism-related activities or on violating the law on demonstrations and marches. 
The rights of the most disadvantaged groups and people belonging to minorities need better 
protection. Roma people remained largely excluded from formal work and their living conditions 
deteriorated severely. Gender-based violence, discrimination, and hate speech against minorities 
(in particular against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and queer (LGBTIQ) persons 
are still a matter of serious concern. 
On migration and asylum policy, Türkiye made some progress. The EU-Turkey Statement 
remained the main framework for cooperation between the EU and Türkiye, and the EU’s 
engagement with Türkiye on migration intensified. Some progress was made on further 
strengthening capacity for surveillance and protection of the land border with Iran. The return of 
irregular migrants from the Greek islands under the EU-Turkey Statement continued to be 
suspended, as it has been since March 2020. In 2021, numbers of irregular migrants arriving 
increased on most routes in comparison to 2020. The increase could be partially due to the lifting 
of measures taken by countries in the region in 2020 to contain the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Although the number of irregular arrivals in Greece has decreased compared to pre-COVID 
figures, irregular arrivals to Italy and to the government-controlled areas of Cyprus have 
increased substantially in the past year and new smuggling routes have been established. Türkiye 
has still not implemented the provisions relating to third-country nationals in the EU-Türkiye 
readmission agreement, which entered into force in October 2017. Overall, the number of illegal 
border crossings between Türkiye and Greece remained significantly lower than it was prior to 
the adoption of the EU-Turkey Statement.  
Türkiye continued to make significant efforts to host and meet the needs of one of the largest 
refugee communities in the world. Out of the full operational budget of EUR 6 billion under the 
Facility for Refugees, over EUR 4.7 billion was disbursed by June 2022. Efficient integration 
measures are needed to address the extended presence of refugees in the country. Access to 
public health for migrants and refugees should be improved. No outstanding visa liberalisation 
benchmarks were fulfilled. Türkiye still needs to further align its legislation with the EU acquis 
on visa policy.   
Türkiye’s unilateral foreign policy continued to be at odds with the EU priorities under the 
common foreign and security policy (CFSP), notably due to its military action in Syria and Iraq 
and a lack of alignment with EU restrictive measures against Russia. Türkiye maintained a very 
low alignment rate with the EU stand on foreign and security policy of 7% (as of August 2022). 
Türkiye’s military support to Libya, including the deployment of foreign fighters on the ground, 
and its persistent criticism of and lack of cooperation with Operation IRINI are detrimental to the 
EU’s effective contribution to implementing the UN arms embargo, and have led to conflicting 
approaches on Libya. Türkiye remains a critically important actor in the Syrian crisis and shares 
with the EU the objective of a stable and prosperous Syria. However, its troops maintained a 
significant presence in the region and in other parts of northern Syria. Türkiye’s security 
 
8 
 
concerns stemming from northern Syria should be addressed through political and diplomatic 
means, not by military action, and in full respect of international humanitarian law. 
The Russian war of aggression against Ukraine was recognised by Türkiye as a state of war and 
Türkiye condemned the Russian aggression. Türkiye enforced the Montreux Convention, 
whereby the passage of warships was limited to those returning to their bases. Turkish 
companies continued to sell military ordnance to Ukraine. Türkiye has aimed to facilitate talks 
between Ukraine and Russia and working on de-escalation and bringing about a cease-fire. It 
also undertook a diplomatic initiative to facilitate the export of Ukrainian grain; the deal agreed 
by Ukraine and Russia on 22 July in Istanbul, facilitated by the UN and Türkiye, would not have 
been possible without the constructive role of Türkiye, which is also involved in facilitating the 
implementation of the deal. Nevertheless, Türkiye refrained from aligning with EU sanctions 
against Russia. Türkiye has signed a Memorandum of Understanding for developing economic 
and trade relations with Russia.  
The improved dynamic in EU-Türkiye relations observed since December 2020, following the 
de-escalation in the Eastern Mediterranean, prevailed for several months before tensions in the 
Aegean resumed in April 2022. In November 2021, following the second review of the 
framework for restrictive measures, the Council extended the regime for one more year until 
12 November 2022. Currently two individuals are subject to sanctions. While there were no 
unauthorised drilling activities by Türkiye in the Eastern Mediterranean during the reporting 
period, tensions have been rising. Turkish warships illegally obstructed survey activity in the 
Cypriot Exclusive Economic Zone. Türkiye’s military exercises in the maritime zones of Cyprus 
continued. Despite the international community, and the EU in particular, condemning Türkiye’s 
unilateral steps, Türkiye continued with its actions to further reopen the fenced-off town of 
Varosha in Cyprus. 
Türkiye needs to commit itself unequivocally to good neighbourly relations, international 
agreements and to the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with the United Nations 
Charter, having recourse, if necessary, to the International Court of Justice. 
The June 2022 European Council expressed deep concern about recent repeated actions and 
statements by Türkiye. It recalled its previous conclusions and the statement of March 2021 and 
reiterated that Türkiye must respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all EU Member 
States. It emphasised that the European Council expects Türkiye to fully respect international 
law, de-escalate tensions in the interest of regional stability in the Eastern Mediterranean, 
promote good neighbourly relations in a sustainable way and fully respect international law. The 
European Council has repeatedly recalled the EU’s strategic interest in a stable and secure 
environment in the Eastern Mediterranean and in the development of a cooperative and mutually 
beneficial relationship with Türkiye. The European Council also reaffirmed its readiness to 
engage with Türkiye in a phased, proportionate and reversible manner in a number of areas of 
common interest, subject to Türkiye meeting the established conditionalities set out in previous 
European Council conclusions, and provided that the de-escalation in the Eastern Mediterranean 
is sustained. 
Regarding the economic criteria, the Turkish economy is well advanced, but made no progress 
over the reporting period. Serious concerns persist over the continued proper functioning of 
Türkiye’s market economy as there has been backsliding on important elements, such as the 
conduct of monetary policy and the institutional and regulatory environment. The economy 
 
9 
 
recovered strongly from the COVID-19-crisis, growing by 11.4 % in 2021, and more than 7 % in 
the first half of  2022 despite the fallout of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The country's overly 
loose monetary policy and lack of policy credibility have weakened the lira and have driven the 
official inflation to a two-decade high of more than 80%. Higher prices for imported 
commodities widened external imbalances, which remain a major vulnerability in a situation of 
increased uncertainty and low level of international reserves. Budget execution outperformed 
plans but government debt increased, and fiscal policy has come increasingly under pressure, 
burdened by unsuccessful attempts to curb rising inflation and underpin the domestic currency. 
The institutional and regulatory environment remains fragile, particularly as regards the 
predictability, transparency, and implementation of regulations. Some important steps were taken 
to improve the resolution of commercial disputes. Despite a gradual decline, the informal sector 
still accounts for a significant share of economic activity. State intervention in the price-setting 
mechanisms persists. The provision of State aid lacks proper implementation rules, enforcement 
and transparency. The banking sector remained largely stable and capital adequacy above the 
regulatory requirements. Non-performing loans decreased, and profitability improved, but 
dollarisation and financial stability risks increased. The labour market recovered from the 
pandemic but deep-seated structural challenges, such as a very significant gender gap, a high rate 
of youth unemployment, and wide regional disparities remain. 
Türkiye has a good level of preparation and has made limited progress during the reporting 
period in developing its capacity to cope with the competitive pressure and market forces in the 
EU. Despite some progress in improving vocational training, the mismatch persists between the 
education system and labour market needs. Expenditure on research and development continued 
to increase very slowly and remained well below the government’s target. Investment activity 
slowed in the second half of 2021. Progress continued with regard to diversifying energy 
supplies and increasing the share of energy generated from renewable sources. The extension of 
local content requirement practices raises concerns. Türkiye removed some of the additional 
custom duties it had introduced in defiance of the commitments under the EU-Turkey Custom 
Union; however, extensive deviations from its obligations under the EU-Turkey Customs Union 
hinder bilateral trade. 
Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of public procurement but made no progress over 
the reporting period and large gaps remained in its alignment with the EU acquis. Türkiye 
continued its discriminatory domestic price advantage and offset practices favouring local 
content. Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of statistics and made limited progress 
during the reporting period. Frequent managerial changes within the Turkish Statistical Institute 
over the last few years, including during the reporting period, have significantly undermined the 
institution’s credibility. The reliability of key economic data has been repeatedly called into 
question. Türkiye has a good level of preparation on financial control, though no progress was 
made during the reporting period. The Public Internal Financial Control policy paper has not yet 
been updated and the anti-fraud coordination service (AFCOS) network has not yet been re-
established. 
Regarding its ability to assume the obligations of membership, Türkiye’s alignment with the 
EU acquis continued to be very limited and pursued on a rather ad hoc basis. 
The internal market cluster is key to the good functioning of the EU-Turkey Customs Union 
and to integrating Türkiye into the EU’s single market. Preparations in the areas of freedom of 
 
10 
 
movement for workers and right of establishment and freedom to provide services are at an early 
stage, as many professions are closed to EU nationals. Türkiye has achieved a good level of 
preparation for the free movement of goods. Technical barriers to trade remained in place. 
Türkiye is moderately prepared on free movement of capital, as limitations continue on foreign 
ownership and on capital movement. Türkiye needs to continue to address outstanding issues in 
its framework regulating the fight against money laundering and terrorist financing. 
Türkiye is well advanced in the area of company law and needs to make further progress in 
aligning with the EU acquis. Türkiye has a good level of preparation in the area of intellectual 
property law but needs to improve enforcement. Türkiye has some level of preparation in the 
area of competition policy. Serious concerns persist in relation to the legislative framework, 
enforcement capacity and transparency in the field of State aid. Türkiye has a good level of 
preparation in the area of financial services and made some progress, including with the 
development of new alternative financing instruments. There is a good level of preparation in 
terms of legislative alignment of consumer and health protection, with some progress made, 
notably on aligning with the EU acquis and in strengthening inter-sectoral cooperation. 
Within the cluster on competitiveness and inclusive growth, Türkiye has some level of 
preparation in the area of digital transformation and media, though it has continued to backslide. 
Türkiye’s preparations in the area of science and research are well advanced and Türkiye made 
good progress during the reporting period, notably with the conclusion of the association 
agreement for Horizon Europe for the 2021-2027 period. Türkiye is moderately prepared on 
education and culture and made some progress, in particular on vocational education, national 
qualifications systems and in terms of Türkiye’s participation in the EU programmes. 
On the economy-related chapters, backsliding continued on economic and monetary policy, 
reflecting inefficient policy on ensuring price stability and anchoring inflation expectations. The 
central bank remains under significant political pressure and its functional independence needs 
to be restored. Türkiye made limited progress on enterprise and industrial policy, and major 
challenges in relation to measures incompatible with EU industrial policy principles remain 
unaddressed. No progress was made during the reporting period in the area of social policy and 
employment, with concerns remaining over trade union rights, the lack of genuine social 
dialogue and persistent levels of informal economic activity. 
While Türkiye is moderately prepared on taxation, it made no progress during the reporting 
period and there remains a need for a clear strategy, avoiding frequent changes in tax rates and 
enabling tax information exchange with all EU Member States. Türkiye maintains a good level 
of preparation for the customs union but made limited progress, notably by removing some 
additional duties applied on imports of products originating in third countries. However, 
Türkiye’s deviations from its obligations under the EU-Turkey Customs Union continue, 
contributing to a high number of trade irritants.  
Regarding the cluster on the Green Agenda and sustainable connectivity, Türkiye is 
moderately prepared in transport policy. It made limited progress during the reporting period, 
mainly linked to the adoption of a plan to significantly increase the use of railway transport. 
Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of energy and made limited progress overall. Progress 
continued on renewable energy deployment, on reforms in the natural gas sector and in 
legislative alignment on nuclear safety. Türkiye is well advanced on trans-European networks 
and made some progress, mainly on energy networks, thanks to the smooth operation of the 
 
11 
 
trans-Anatolian pipeline. The construction of the Halkali-Kapikule railway line connecting the 
Bulgarian border to Istanbul continued. Türkiye has some level of preparation in the area of 
environment and climate change, but made no progress overall during the reporting period. 
Türkiye faces critical environmental and climate challenges, both in relation to mitigation and 
adaptation. More ambitious and better coordinated environment and climate policies need to be 
drawn up and implemented. Türkiye still needs to increase and implement its contribution to the 
Paris Agreement on climate change and complete its alignment with the acquis on climate 
action. 
On the cluster covering resources, agriculture and cohesion, Türkiye reached some level of 
preparation in the area of agriculture and rural development. Backsliding continued during the 
reporting period, as its agricultural policy keeps moving away from the main principles of the 
EU common agricultural policy and Türkiye continued to restrict imports of agricultural 
products from the EU. Türkiye is a major exporter of food products to the EU and made limited 
progress during the reporting period in the area of food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary 
policy. Full implementation of the EU acquis in this area requires significant further work.  
Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of fisheries and continued to make good progress, 
notably as regards the implementation of the new fisheries law, resources and fleet management, 
and inspection and control. Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of regional policy and the 
coordination of structural instruments and continued to make some progress on accelerating the 
absorption of IPA II funds. Türkiye has some level of preparation in the area of financial and 
budgetary provisions, but made no progress during the reporting period. 
In the external relations cluster, Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of external 
relations and made limited progress in the reporting period, notably due to continued deviation 
from the Common Customs Tariff. Divergence from the EU Generalised Scheme of Preferences 
persisted, in violation of the EU-Turkey Customs Union. Türkiye’s official development 
assistance was largely directed towards humanitarian support for the Syria-related activities on 
Türkiye’s own territory. Türkiye has some level of preparation in the area of foreign, security 
and defence policy. Overall, Türkiye’s foreign policy continued to be at odds with the EU 
priorities under the common foreign and security policy (CFSP). Türkiye’s non-alignment with 
EU restrictive measures against Russia is of particular concern due to the free circulation of 
products, including dual use goods, within the EU-Turkey Customs Union. This creates a risk of 
undermining EU restrictive measures. For the Customs Union to continue functioning the parties 
must fully respect existing rules and avoid undermining mutual trust. 
Overall, in many areas, significant further work is needed on legislative alignment with the EU 
acquis. In all areas, implementation and enforcement needs substantial improvement. Ensuring 
the independence of regulatory authorities and developing administrative capacity are key for 
Türkiye to achieve further progress. 
2. CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
2.1. FUNCTIONING OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION REFORM 
2.1.1. Democracy 
The functioning of Türkiye’s democratic institutions continued to be severely hampered. During 
the reporting period, democratic backsliding and deep political polarisation continued. The 
presidential system’s structural defects remained in place. Despite the lifting of the state of