2 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION1  
1.1. 
CONTEXT 
Türkiye is a key partner for the European Union and a candidate country. In December 2024, 
the Council2 restated the EU’s strategic interest in a stable and secure environment in the 
Eastern Mediterranean and in the development of a cooperative and mutually beneficial 
relationship with Türkiye. The Council stressed again that the EU attaches particular 
importance to resumption of and progress in the Cyprus settlement talks in further 
enhancing EU-Türkiye cooperation. Both the EU and Türkiye pursue re-engagement in areas 
of mutual interest, in line with the recommendations of the Joint Communication on EU-
Türkiye relations of 23 November 20233 and the relevant European Council Conclusions. The 
EU is re-engaging constructively with Türkiye in a phased, proportionate and reversible 
manner, subject to established conditionalities; high-level engagement continued in areas of 
joint interest4.  
Accession negotiations with Türkiye have remained at a standstill since 2018, as reiterated 
by the Council Conclusions of December 2024. The EU’s serious concerns about the 
continued deterioration of democratic standards, the rule of law, the independence of the 
judiciary and respect for fundamental rights were not addressed. The arrests of and charges 
brought against elected officials, opposition figures, political activists, civil society and 
business representatives, journalists, and others since the beginning of 2025, gave rise to 
increasing questions regarding Türkiye’s adherence to its democratic tradition, and 
deepened concerns about the independence of the judiciary. 
The 2016 EU-Turkey Statement continued to yield results and remained the key framework 
for cooperation on migration. Türkiye sustained its remarkable efforts to host 2.7 million 
refugees  including Syrians under temporary protection. The EU has mobilised 
EUR 12.5 billion to support refugees and host communities since 2011. The EU continued to 
provide assistance in areas such as basic needs, border management, education, 
healthcare, protection and socio-economic support. On the economic side, Türkiye remained 
the EU’s fifth largest trading partner in 2024, with trade reaching a record high of over 
EUR 210 billion. Türkiye has also asserted an increasingly active and multi-layered foreign 
policy. Increasing geopolitical challenges underscored its strategic regional role, particularly 
in relation to developments in Syria, Ukraine, Gaza and South Caucasus. 
Since 2023, bilateral relations between Türkiye and Greece have improved, with Türkiye not 
engaging in any unauthorised drilling activities in the Eastern Mediterranean or in flights over 
Greek islands. Türkiye continued to refuse to recognise the Republic of Cyprus and 
 
1 This report covers the period from 1 September 2024 to 1 September 2025. It is based on input from a variety of 
sources, including contributions from the government of Türkiye, EU Member States, European Parliament 
reports and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also includes the 
results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule 
of law.  
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of 
preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made 
during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, 
good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been used. 
2 During the reporting period, the Council of the EU adopted Conclusions concerning Türkiye on 
17 December 2024.  
3 JOIN(2023) 50 final 
4 The EU-Türkiye High-Level Dialogue on Economy took place in April 2025; the EU-Türkiye High-Level Dialogue on 
Trade and High-Level Dialogue on Migration and Security took place in July 2025; and the EU-Türkiye High-Level 
Dialogue on Climate took place in October 2025. 
 
3 
 
repeatedly advocated a two-state solution in Cyprus, contrary to relevant UN Security 
Council Resolutions.  
1.2. MAIN FINDINGS OF THE REPORT 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
Democracy 
The general framework of the elections ensures free choice between alternative political 
options but does not provide a level playing field for all political stakeholders. Excessive 
judicial pressure on opposition politicians stifles political competition, thereby undermining 
fundamental democratic principles. Türkiye has not implemented the recommendations to 
improve the election process issued by the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human 
Rights of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe and the Council of 
Europe’s European Commission for Democracy through Law (Venice Commission). 
While the Parliament formally has powers – including control of the executive and 
involvement in the legislative process, it can exercise them only in a constrained way. The 
highly centralised presidential system, which has seriously weakened Parliament’s 
prerogatives and the separation of powers, remained in place.  
The system lacks effective checks and balances, and the tools needed to hold the 
government accountable beyond elections. Most regulatory authorities remain directly 
linked to the Presidency, and public administration is highly politicised. Local democracy 
was further weakened as elected opposition mayors were prosecuted and removed, with 
some being replaced by government-appointed trustees. 
The institutions in charge of the EU integration process are in place, and are well staffed and 
effective.  
Civil society organisations (CSOs) continue to operate in a difficult and increasingly 
restrictive environment. The civic space has further shrunk due to sustained judicial and 
administrative pressures from the authorities, hindering the work of CSOs. Despite this, civil 
society continued to be vocal and participates actively in civic life, making crucial 
contributions in several areas. Türkiye needs to ensure that independent CSOs are 
effectively consulted on new legislation and policies. 
Public administration reform 
Türkiye is between having some and a moderate level of preparation and made no progress 
in the reporting period.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular:  
→ prepare and adopt an overarching strategy for public administration and public financial 
management reform in line with the EU principles and after extensive consultations; 
→ introduce merit-based recruitment, appointments and promotions, notably to senior 
positions; 
→ review the policymaking process to achieve inclusive and evidence-based methods of 
preparing policy planning documents and legislative proposals. 
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights 
Türkiye remains at an early stage of preparation in the area of the rule of law and 
 
4 
 
fundamental rights. Backsliding occurred on key issues identified in previous reports and 
the serious concerns noted in previous reports heightened. 
Functioning of the judiciary 
Türkiye’s judiciary is still at an early stage of preparation and backsliding resumed. 
Fundamental systemic shortcomings were not addressed. The judiciary continues to remain 
under the control of the executive, affecting the independence and compromising the quality 
of judicial outcomes. The judiciary has repeatedly acted selectively, targeting opposition 
figures and elected officials, while refraining from pursuing similar action against the ruling 
coalition’s officials. This dynamic casts doubt on the impartiality of judicial proceedings and 
brought public trust in the legal system down to an all-time low. The judicial system still 
failed to implement certain judgments of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR), 
while several courts refused to implement rulings of the Turkish Constitutional Court, 
undermining the integrity and the functioning of the entire system. 
The European Commission’s prior recommendations for addressing these issues still need 
to be implemented and therefore remain valid and are considered even more urgent. In the 
coming year, Türkiye should focus on the following areas: 
→ create a political and legal environment in line with European standards that allows the 
judiciary to carry out its duties independently and impartially, strengthen the separation 
of powers, and ensure that lower courts respect judgments by the Constitutional Court, 
whose decisions should abide by ECtHR jurisprudence; 
→ amend the structure and selection processes of the Council of Judges and Prosecutors 
(HSK) so that the role and influence of the executive is limited, and introduce safeguards 
against interference by the HSK or senior officials in judicial proceedings;  
→ ensure that all judicial proceedings respect fundamental rights, with a special emphasis 
on victims and procedural protection for suspects and accused persons, duly guarantee 
the presumption of innocence, the principles of individual criminal responsibility and 
legal certainty, the right of defence, and the right to a fair trial. 
Fight against corruption 
Türkiye is still at an early stage of preparation in the fight against corruption and no 
progress was made in the reporting period. The country has neither created a framework for 
the prevention and control of corruption, nor set up anti-corruption bodies in accordance 
with the Council of Europe’s Civil and Criminal Law Conventions on Corruption, the Group of 
States against Corruption (GRECO) recommendations, and the UN Convention against 
Corruption. The legal framework and institutional structure require improvement to limit 
undue political influence in prosecuting and adjudicating corruption cases. During the 
reporting period, several high-level corruption cases were launched against opposition-
elected mayors in major cities and districts, while no investigation was launched against 
current or former elected officials from the ruling party in large cities. These selective 
investigations/prosecutions do not ensure trust in the effectiveness of the authorities’ fight 
against corruption. An effective fight against corruption requires clear political guidance, 
together with independent, accountable, transparent and effective public institutions, 
starting with investigative and judicial bodies. Progress in the fight against corruption is 
therefore also hampered by the lack of independence of the judiciary. Targeted risk 
assessments and specific measures are also needed to address corruption in the most 
vulnerable sectors.   
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
 
5 
 
→ implement its international obligations in relation to the fight against corruption, in 
particular the UN Convention against Corruption and the relevant Council of Europe 
Conventions; 
→ ensure effective follow-up to the recommendations issued by GRECO, including by 
adopting the necessary legislation, as indicated in the EU-Turkey Visa Liberalisation 
Roadmap; 
→ develop an anti-corruption strategy that reflects a clear political will and vision to 
effectively address corruption, underpinned by a credible and realistic action plan. 
Fundamental rights 
The overall human rights situation in the country deteriorated. While the Turkish legal 
framework provides general guarantees for the respect of human and fundamental rights, 
parts of Türkiye’s legislation and its implementation are not in line with the European 
Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and ECtHR case law. Investigations, prosecutions and 
convictions of journalists, writers, lawyers, academics, human rights defenders and other 
critical voices for alleged support for terrorism intensified in the reporting period. For the 
first time in several years, a sitting chair of a legal political party was prosecuted for his 
public speeches. Judicial action against opposition politicians continued, and investigations 
were launched against one opposition political party.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ align its anti-terror legislation and its implementation, with European standards, the 
ECHR, ECtHR case law, the Venice Commission’s recommendations, and the EU acquis 
and practices;  
→ improve the legislative framework and its implementation in order to effectively protect 
women’s rights and gender equality, to effectively tackle all forms of racism and 
discrimination, including against LGBTIQ persons, and to ensure the protection of 
minorities;  
→ implement the ECtHR judgments as a matter of priority, including in the case of Kavala vs 
Türkiye. 
Freedom of expression 
Türkiye remains at an early stage of preparation in this area and there was backsliding 
during the reporting period. The implementation of criminal laws related to national security 
and counterterrorism continued to violate the ECHR and to diverge from the case law of the 
ECtHR, hindering freedom of expression. Judicial and administrative action against 
journalists, media and other voices that are critical of the government intensified. The media 
and broadcasting regulator continued to impose administrative and monetary fines in a 
discriminatory way, targeting almost exclusively independent and opposition media outlets. 
A new law on cybersecurity. like the 2022 Disinformation law, raises serious concerns due to 
vague rules and the lack of independent oversight that may result in further restrictions on 
fundamental rights and freedoms.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ release journalists, human rights defenders, lawyers, writers and academics being held in 
pre-trial detention, and ensure that the criminal cases against them are concluded in 
accordance with the criteria set by the ECHR and the ECtHR;  
 
6 
 
→ revise its criminal legislation, in particular the anti-terror law, the Criminal Code, the data 
protection law, the internet law, the disinformation law, the cybersecurity law, as well as 
the legal framework related to the Radio and Television Supreme Council and the 
Internet Supervisory Authority, to ensure that they comply with European standards and 
are implemented in a proportionate and non-discriminatory manner that does not curtail 
freedom of expression; 
→ take steps to restore a safe and pluralist environment that enables the media to carry out 
their work independently and without fear of reprisals or dismissals.  
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security 
Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of justice, freedom and security. Some progress 
was made in this area, particularly in relation to further strengthening the capacity to survey 
and protect the land border with Iran. Türkiye continued to make significant efforts to host 
and support 2.7 million refugees including Syrians under temporary protection. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ fully implement the EU-Turkey Statement of March 2016, particularly by resuming returns 
from the Greek islands, and implement all provisions of the EU-Turkey Readmission 
Agreement in relation to all EU Member States; 
→ align legislation on personal data protection with the EU acquis, facilitating the 
conclusion of an international agreement on the exchange of personal data between 
Europol and Türkiye; 
→ adopt and implement a strategy and action plan on border management to improve 
coordination between border services at national and international levels. 
Fight against serious and organised crime 
Türkiye has some level of preparation in implementing the EU acquis in this area. Limited 
progress was made overall in aligning with the EU acquis and practices. The completion of 
an international agreement on the exchange of personal data between Europol and the 
Turkish authorities responsible for fighting serious crime and terrorism is still pending, as 
Turkish data protection legislation is not yet in line with the EU acquis. Organised crime 
remains a threat. Progress in increasing the legal and institutional capacity to successfully 
prosecute and convict organized crime cases is inadequate. The Commission’s 
recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and therefore remain 
mostly valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ continue to improve its legal framework and practices on counterterrorism in line with 
the EU acquis, and strengthen its anti-money laundering, terrorist financing and financing 
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction system in line with the 
recommendations of the Venice Commission; 
→ conclude an international agreement with the EU on cooperation with Eurojust; further 
increase its operational willingness to cooperate and exchange information with EU law 
enforcement partners and engage in effective judicial cooperation with EU Member 
States; 
→ improve its legislation on witness protection and data protection. 
 
 
 
7 
 
ECONOMIC CRITERIA 
The existence of a functioning market economy 
Türkiye is well advanced in creating a functioning market economy and made some 
progress over the reporting period. Faced with the economic fallout of domestic political 
turmoil, the authorities tightened their policy stance further. Economic growth moderated 
amid weakening domestic demand, while the external position strengthened. Tight monetary 
policy was instrumental in bringing down inflation and inflationary expectations, although 
both remained elevated. The banking sector remained stable. Fiscal consolidation advanced 
largely due to the winding-down of earthquake reconstruction spending. The labour market 
was strong in 2024, but still faces major structural challenges, such as large labour 
underutilisation, a high youth unemployment rate, and a low female participation rate. The 
authorities took limited steps to improve the business environment, which were mostly 
related to the functioning of the judiciary and specialised courts. State aid control remained 
weak, and transparency declined. 
The policy guidance set out in the conclusions of the Economic and Financial Dialogue of 
May 2024 was partially implemented, but implementation improved markedly in comparison 
with previous years. To improve the functioning of the market economy, Türkiye should in 
particular: 
→ maintain a tight economic policy stance to support disinflation; 
→ reduce the budget deficit as planned; 
→ further improve the business environment by increasing institutionalised and inclusive 
stakeholder consultation, reducing state interference in price-setting mechanisms, 
preventing State aid that distorts competition, and ensuring State aid transparency. 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the EU 
Türkiye has a good level of preparation and made limited progress in increasing its capacity 
to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the EU. 
The economy is diversified, with a well-developed service sector and strong manufacturing 
and agriculture sectors. Investment activity decelerated slightly in 2024. While efforts to 
boost human capital and the innovation system continued, skills mismatches and 
insufficient innovation persist. Economic integration with the EU remained high. 
The Commission’s recommendations from 2024 were only partially implemented. To 
improve competitiveness and support long-term growth, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ further tailor education and training to labour market needs, improve the quality of and 
access to vocational education and training, and support the school-to-work transition; 
→ continue efforts to diversify energy supplies and further increase the share of renewables 
in the energy mix, while ensuring stability and reliability of the grid;  
→ improve small to medium-sized enterprises’ access to long-term finance. 
Chapter 5: Public procurement 
Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of public procurement. No progress was made in 
this area over the reporting period and significant gaps with the EU acquis remain.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented, and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
 
8 
 
→ revise its public procurement legislation to further align it with the EU acquis, including on 
utilities, concessions and public-private partnerships, and to increase transparency; 
→ reduce the excessive use of the negotiated procedure and improve instruments to 
evaluate contract performance and benchmark the effectiveness of public procurement 
procedures and contract management; 
→ repeal exemptions that are incompatible with the EU acquis and avoid the use of 
discriminatory domestic price advantages and offset practices. 
Chapter 18: Statistics 
Türkiye is moderately prepared on statistics. Some progress was made, notably by 
improving its national accounts, excessive deficit procedure, and government finance 
statistics. The Turkish Statistical Institute (TurkStat) stepped up its efforts to further align 
with the new requirements for short-term business statistics. The preparations for the 
agricultural census also advanced. However, Türkiye needs to increase the credibility of 
TurkStat and strengthen public trust in official statistics. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and 
therefore remain mostly valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ establish transparent, professional criteria for the appointment of the President of 
TurkStat and any grounds for dismissal, to strengthen the professional and scientific 
independence of TurkStat; 
→ continue work to align national accounts with the European System of Accounts (ESA 
2010) and the requirements of the ESA 2010 transmission programme, including 
amplified efforts to remove the flags preventing the publication of data; 
→ further improve statistics on agriculture (including completion of the agricultural census) 
and on migration and asylum. 
Chapter 32: Financial control 
 
Türkiye has a good level of preparation on financial control. It made no progress throughout 
the reporting period. The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not 
implemented, and therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ organise a new round of public expenditure and financial accountability to assess the 
performance of the current public finance management, update the public internal 
financial control policy paper and the related action plan, and help prepare a 
comprehensive public financial management strategy; 
→ develop and adopt a national anti-fraud strategy; 
→  review the arrangements for including municipalities and state-owned enterprises in the 
treasury single account. 
 
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET 
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods 
Türkiye has a good level of preparation on the free movement of goods. Some progress was 
made in aligning with the EU acquis, particularly under the ‘old approach’ and the ‘new and 
global approach’ to product legislation. Türkiye removed some technical barriers to trade in 
the reporting period. Yet, there are remaining unjustified checks for EU products and 
requirements discriminating against EU products, in breach of Türkiye’s obligations under 
 
9 
 
the Customs Union. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and 
therefore remain mostly valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ continue to eliminate the remaining non-tariff barriers to the free movement of goods 
that are in breach of Customs Union obligations, with particular attention to the priority 
barriers discussed in the context of the July 2025 High-Level Dialogue on Trade; 
→ review the remaining schemes setting local content requirements; 
→ increase the coverage and effectiveness of market surveillance measures, particularly in 
e-commerce. 
Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers 
Türkiye remains at an early stage of preparation on the freedom of movement for workers. 
No progress was made during the reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendation from last year was not implemented, and therefore 
remains valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ prepare legislation and administrative practices in view of joining the European 
Employment Services (EURES) network; 
→ align national legislation with EU acquis on access for EU citizens to the labour market. 
Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services 
Türkiye remains at an early stage of preparation on the right of establishment and freedom 
to provide services. No progress was made during the reporting period. Overall, substantial 
efforts are still required to achieve alignment in this area. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented, and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular:  
→ align national legislation with the Services Directive and set up a point of single contact; 
→ continue to align its legislation in the area of postal services with the EU acquis; 
→ align national legislation with the EU acquis on mutual recognition of professional 
qualifications, including the Professional Qualifications Directive and the Proportionality 
Test Directive. 
Chapter 4: Free movement of capital 
Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of free movement of capital. Some progress was 
made during the reporting period. Building on recent reforms intended to enable the 
country’s removal from the Financial Action Task Force’s (FATF) grey list, Türkiye continued 
to strengthen its legal framework and administrative capacity for combating money 
laundering and terrorist financing. While limited steps were taken on foreign ownership and 
capital movements, limitations persist in numerous sectors. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and 
therefore remain mostly valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ minimise limitations on foreign ownership and capital movements; 
 
10 
 
→ further align with the FATF recommendations and the EU acquis by strengthening the 
legal framework and administrative capacity to more effectively prevent money 
laundering and the financing of terrorism. 
Chapter 6: Company law 
Türkiye is well advanced on company law. Limited progress was made during the reporting 
period by adopting accounting principles for the measurement and classification of crypto 
assets.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ further align its national legislation with the EU acquis on shareholder rights on 
encouragement of long-term shareholder engagement and cross-border conversions, 
mergers and divisions; 
→ put arrangements in place for company reporting, including corporate sustainability 
reporting and disclosure of income tax information (country-by-country reporting); 
→ take steps to align its legislation with the EU acquis to improve gender balance among 
directors of listed companies and take related measures. 
Chapter 7: Intellectual property law 
Türkiye has a good level of preparation on intellectual property law. Limited progress was 
made during the reporting period. There are still some legislative discrepancies as well as 
outstanding problems with implementation and enforcement, notably in relation to judicial 
procedures. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ improve enforcement measures to efficiently fight intellectual property right (IPR) 
infringements, including online sales of counterfeit and pirated goods, improve the level 
of IPR specialisation of judges, and resolve difficulties in the judicial procedures to 
obtain search and seizure warrants for criminal law enforcement; 
→ further improve cooperation with IPR holders for efficient implementation and effective 
enforcement, particularly in cases involving accelerated and simplified destruction 
procedures applied by the judiciary and customs authorities; 
→ ensure the collection and processing of accurate statistical data, especially on the 
effective judicial enforcement of intellectual and industrial property rights, to better 
analyse systemic IPR shortcomings. 
Chapter 8: Competition policy 
Türkiye has some level of preparation on competition policy. No progress was made during 
the reporting period. Concerns remain in the area of State aid.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented, and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ ensure the independence and functionality of the State aid institutional framework in 
accordance with the EU acquis; 
→ implement the State aid law by adopting implementing legislation without further delay; 
 
11 
 
→ make available a transparent and up-to-date inventory of all aid schemes. 
Chapter 9: Financial services 
Türkiye has a good level of preparation on financial services. Limited progress was made 
during the reporting period, in particular by further unwinding the disruptive macroprudential 
and regulatory measures in the financial sector. Türkiye took some steps to promote 
investments in venture capital companies and strengthen the legal framework for crypto 
assets. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and 
therefore remain largely valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ increase efforts to align its legislation with the revised Capital Requirements Regulation, 
Capital Requirements Directive and Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive; 
→ further phase out the distortive macroprudential measures and simplify the regulatory 
framework; 
→ further align its legislation with the EU acquis related to capital markets and financial 
market infrastructures, and ensure their proper supervision. 
Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection 
Türkiye has a good level of preparation on consumer and health protection. Limited 
progress was made during the reporting period, notably by strengthening its surveillance 
system for health services and tackling serious cross-border health threats, as well as on the 
de-institutionalisation of mental health services. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and 
therefore remain mostly valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ strengthen consumer rights enforcement, and further improve coordination and 
cooperation with the consumer movement and with enforcement bodies; increase 
awareness-raising activities, take more measures on infringements in the digital 
environment, and introduce more measures to support vulnerable consumers; 
→ strengthen its primary healthcare services by providing sufficient resources for public 
health emergencies risk assessment and risk management at central and provincial 
levels, and by boosting its workforce and administrative capacity for preparedness and 
response to disasters; 
→ start preparing to align its legislation with the new EU Regulation on substances of 
human origin. 
 
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH 
Chapter 10: Digital transformation and media 
Türkiye has some level of preparation on digital transformation and media. Some progress 
was made during the reporting period. Türkiye recorded progress on e-commerce and e-
governance, and adopted the 2030 Technology and Industry Strategy and a cybersecurity 
strategy and action plan.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, 
particularly as regards cybersecurity and 5G, and therefore remain valid. In the coming year, 
Türkiye should in particular: 
 
12 
 
→ align its universal service, authorisation arrangements, and rules on market access and 
rights of way in electronic communications with the EU acquis; 
→ align its cybersecurity framework with EU cybersecurity standards, including with the 
NIS 2 Directive and the 5G Cybersecurity Toolbox;  
→ strengthen the independence of the regulatory authority and its board members, and 
amend the internet law in line with the Venice Commission’s recommendations to 
ensure media pluralism; and take steps to strengthen the public broadcaster’s 
independence. 
Chapter 16: Taxation 
Türkiye is moderately prepared on taxation. No progress was made over the reporting 
period.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented, and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ enable the automatic exchange of tax information with all EU Member States according 
to international standards; 
→ continue to align its legislation on value added tax and excise duties, notably the range 
of excisable energy products, with the EU acquis; 
→ continue to fight against the informal economy, and report on progress transparently 
using key performance indicators. 
Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy 
Türkiye has some level of preparation on economic and monetary policy. Good progress 
was made during the reporting period, notably by taking measures to support the monetary 
policy transmission mechanism and presenting a more realistic macroeconomic framework. 
Türkiye also made improvements in data quality and timeliness of reporting under the 
excessive deficit procedure. 
The Commission's recommendations from last year were partially implemented, and 
therefore remain mostly valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ safeguard the independence of the central bank; 
→ further simplify the monetary policy framework under a transparent monetary policy, 
while maintaining financial stability. 
Chapter 19: Social policy and employment 
Türkiye has some level of preparation on social policy and employment. No progress was 
made over the reporting period. Concerns remain regarding discrimination in employment, 
trade union rights, persistent levels of informal employment, with the Roma community 
particularly affected, the labour market gender gap, and income inequalities.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year remain mostly valid. In the coming year, 
Türkiye should in particular:  
→ take steps to align with the EU acquis on non-discrimination based on racial and ethnic 
origin, religion and belief, disability, age and sexual orientation, equal opportunities in the 
workplace, work-life balance, and pay transparency. 
→ remove obstacles that limit the unionisation and collective bargaining rights by using 
social dialogue mechanisms effectively; 
 
13 
 
→ tackle challenges to health and safety at work, particularly in relation to fatal incidents in 
the construction sector and among platform workers and young apprentices; 
→ increase the formal employment rate of women and young people by expanding 
affordable care services and adopting more substantial and more effective active labour 
market programmes. 
Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy 
Türkiye is moderately prepared on enterprise and industrial policy. Limited progress was 
made during the reporting period by adopting a new strategy document and conducting 
impact assessments of a few support schemes. Concerns persist regarding the 
compatibility of public procurement practices with EU industrial policy principles, the lack of 
transparency in State-aid for large investments, and the sizeable informal economy. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ remove public procurement price premiums that are incompatible with EU industrial 
policy principles, and substitute them with measures that encourage innovation; 
→ publish the amounts distributed under the industry support programme as well as the 
results of the industrial strategies from previous periods; 
→ continue assessing the impact of the SME support framework to reduce gaps and 
overlaps. 
Chapter 25: Science and research 
Türkiye is well advanced on science and research. Good progress was made during the 
reporting period, notably linked to participation in Horizon Europe and continued actions to 
raise awareness of and increase capacity for the programme. There is active and expanding 
cooperation between the EU and Türkiye on research and innovation underlined by the 
improved ranking of Türkiye in the European Innovation Scoreboard. 
The Commission’s recommendation from last year was only partially implemented, and 
therefore remains valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular:  
→ step up efforts to boost innovation to ensure continuous improvements to the European 
Innovation Scoreboard rankings. 
Chapter 26: Education and culture 
Türkiye is moderately prepared on education and culture. Some progress was made during 
the reporting period, notably regarding the vocational education and national qualifications 
systems. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ further improve inclusive education, with a particular focus on girls and children from 
disadvantaged groups including Roma, and closely monitor and continue work to reduce 
the proportion of school dropouts; 
→ ensure the good functioning of the Turkish Qualifications Framework and the Turkish 
Higher Education Quality Council; 
→ continue taking steps to implement the 2005 UNESCO Convention on the Protection and 
Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions. 
 
14 
 
Chapter 29: Customs Union 
Türkiye maintains a good level of preparation on the Customs Union. No progress was 
made during the reporting period. Duty relief, free zones and the surveillance scheme are 
still not fully aligned with the EU acquis, and are in breach of the Customs Union rules. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year remain mostly valid. In the coming year, 
Türkiye should in particular: 
→ step up efforts to fully align new legislation with the EU Customs Code and bring risk-
based controls and simplified procedures in line with the EU acquis; 
→ strengthen controls and cooperation with the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) in 
administrative investigations, e.g. in cases of transhipment or simple transformation of 
goods in the country that could lead to false declaration of origin of goods at import into 
the EU; 
→ continue to eliminate import and export restrictions as well as additional duties on 
goods in free circulation in the EU-Turkey Customs Union. 
 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY 
Chapter 14: Transport policy 
Türkiye remains moderately prepared on transport policy. Limited progress was made 
during the reporting period, particularly regarding sustainable transport strategies and 
sectoral legislative adjustments. Türkiye’s general compliance with the EU transport acquis 
still presents gaps, notably in road safety, rail liberalisation, maritime safety, and multimodal 
transport facilitation. The provision of subsidies to the incumbent railway operator 
continued at an increasing pace.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ consider measures for effective monitoring, along with potential feasibility schemes to 
support the uptake of new and green technologies for alternative fuels in Türkiye; 
→ consider establishing tools and capacity building at private and public level for transport 
decarbonisation, starting with aviation and maritime transport, and set interim targets; 
→ finalise and publish its first white paper on sustainable urban mobility planning, including 
disaster aspects, as part of the ongoing work on the sustainable urban mobility plans, 
while improving policy dialogue and increasing coordination between local and central 
authorities. 
Chapter 15: Energy 
Türkiye is moderately prepared on energy. Limited progress was made during the reporting 
period, with the roll-out of renewable energy and energy efficiency as well as further 
diversification of energy sources. Local content requirement practices in the renewable 
energy sector remain in place. Türkiye’s legislative changes related to the natural gas market 
do not yet ensure compatibility with the EU’s third energy package. Energy dependency on 
Russia continued. Türkiye continued to make efforts on the legislative alignment of nuclear 
safety regulations. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and 
therefore remain mostly valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
 
15 
 
→ deepen natural gas market reform by setting up a legally binding plan and a timetable for 
unbundling activities to ensure consistency with the natural gas market law and the EU’s 
third energy package of 2009 and its update, the EU’s hydrogen and gas decarbonisation 
package of 2024;  
→ transition to non-price measures to tackle energy poverty and provide economic relief to 
eligible households, in order to restore market-based retail pricing and remove 
disincentives to energy efficiency gains; 
→ complete 
the 
legislative 
alignment 
with 
Euratom 
acquis, 
and 
address 
the 
recommendations from the stress tests on the Akkuyu nuclear power plant. 
Chapter 21: Trans-European networks 
Türkiye is well advanced on trans-European networks. Limited progress was made during 
the reporting period. On transport networks, Türkiye continued to advance projects that 
contribute to the extension of the comprehensive trans-European transport networks to its 
territory, and the construction of the Halkalı-Kapıkule railway advanced. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ create a transparent, cost-reflective and non-discriminatory gas transit framework in line 
with the EU acquis; 
→ take concrete steps to mobilise investments for Yavuz Sultan Selim Bridge railway 
connections while increasing the rail capacity of the Marmaray tunnel and optimising 
freight operations; 
→ accelerate action to align with key pieces of the EU acquis to facilitate alignment in the 
trans-European networks. 
Chapter 27: Environment and climate change 
Türkiye has some level of preparation on environment and made some progress over the 
reporting period. Türkiye took some steps on industrial emissions and waste management. 
On climate change, Türkiye adopted the 2053 Long-Term Climate Strategy and a climate law 
setting up an emissions trading system. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ ensure that environmental standards are met when building back better in the 
earthquake-affected areas, in particular by fully implementing the Environmental Impact 
Assessment Directive and other horizontal environmental legislation, and ensure that 
protection from exposure to asbestos in the earthquakes affected areas is duly 
implemented; 
→ complete alignment with the Directives on industrial emissions, water and waste as well 
as on nature protection and air quality; 
→ complete its alignment with the EU acquis on climate action, notably but not limited to 
emission trading, and submit a more ambitious Nationally Determined Contribution  to 
the UNFCCC. 
 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION 
 
16 
 
Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development 
Türkiye has some level of preparation on agriculture and rural development. Limited 
progress was made in the reporting period. Türkiye’s agricultural support policy continued to 
move away from the principles of the EU common agricultural policy. Notable improvements 
were made on the implementation of the EU Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance for 
Rural Development (IPARD), with an increased national financial contribution and a 
significant absorption of funds. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ align legislation to the EU acquis, notably on the agricultural support policy; 
→ set up a farm sustainability data network and an integrated administration and control 
system; 
→ pursue the opening and transparent management of import quotas for beef and live 
bovine animals on a lasting basis. 
Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy 
Türkiye has some level of preparation on food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy. 
No progress was made over the reporting period. Full implementation of the EU acquis in 
this area requires significant further work. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented, and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ upgrade producing food, feed and animal by-products to meet EU structural standards, 
notably for raw milk; 
→ meet EU maximum limits for pesticide residues, and effectively address recurrent 
shortcomings; 
→ integrate the EU’s One Health approach into the zoonosis control system. 
Chapter 13: Fisheries and aquaculture 
Türkiye is moderately prepared on fisheries and aquaculture. Some progress was made, 
notably on resources and fleet management, and on inspection and controls.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ further improve data collection and sharing to support scientific advice for sustainable 
fisheries management in line with EU law; 
→ step up efforts to align its market policy with EU rules, in particular on the criteria 
governing the recognition and roles of professional organisations; 
→ accelerate alignment of monitoring, control, enforcement, surveillance and inspection of 
fisheries in the Mediterranean Sea with European standards, and strengthen efforts to 
combat illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing. 
Chapter 22: Regional policy and the coordination of structural instruments 
Türkiye is moderately prepared on regional policy and coordination of structural 
instruments. No progress was made during the reporting period.  
 
17 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year remain mostly valid. In the coming year, 
Türkiye should in particular: 
→ ensure the proper functioning of local democracy and more balanced regional 
development; 
→ improve the monitoring of ongoing operations under the Instrument for Pre-accession 
Assistance (IPA II), and accelerate implementation under IPA III with high-quality results 
and avoiding decommitments; 
→ address 
over-centralisation 
and 
structural 
weaknesses 
in 
regional 
policy 
implementation. 
Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions 
Türkiye has some level of preparation on financial and budgetary provisions. No progress 
was made over the reporting period.  
The Commission’s recommendation from last year was not met, and therefore remains 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ further align the gross national income inventory with Eurostat’s GNI Inventory Guide. 
 
CLUSTER 6: EXTERNAL RELATIONS 
Chapter 30: External relations 
Türkiye is moderately prepared on external relations. Limited progress was made in the 
reporting period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented, and therefore 
remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ fully realign the customs tariff with the Common Customs Tariff; 
→ complete alignment with the EU’s Generalised Scheme of Preferences and dual-use 
export control regime; 
→ align its (future revised) national legislation on the screening of foreign investments with 
the EU foreign direct investments (FDI) Screening Regulation 2019/452. 
Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy 
Türkiye has some level of preparation on common foreign, security and defence policy, and 
made limited progress. While showing little political will to harmonise its foreign policy with 
the EU’s, Türkiye appeared more open to substantive exchanges with the EU on foreign 
policy and regional issues. In this regard, a number of EU-Türkiye foreign and regional policy 
dialogues and consultations took place during the reporting period. Türkiye did not 
demonstrate willingness to improve its alignment with the EU’s common foreign and 
security policy (CFSP). Absence of any effort to improve alignment contravenes Türkiye’s 
proclaimed strategic goal of joining the EU.  
Türkiye continued to implement an active and multi-layered foreign policy. Increasing 
geopolitical challenges underscored Türkiye’s strategic regional role and highlighted the 
shared interest and responsibility of the EU and Türkiye to address common challenges.  
As regards Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, Türkiye continued to highlight its 
facilitation and potential mediation role, as underpinned by hosting direct talks between 
 
18 
 
Russia and Ukraine in Istanbul in May, June and July 2025. Türkiye consistently does not 
align with the EU’s restrictive measures against Russia; however, it has made steps to 
prevent the circumvention of sanctions against Russia via Turkish territory, delivering some 
results. 
On the Middle East peace process, Türkiye aligns with the EU’s position on the need to 
relaunch the political process in order to implement the two-state solution, and participates 
in the ‘Global Coalition’ for its implementation. The Turkish position on certain issues – such 
as Hamas, which is considered a legitimate political interlocutor by Ankara – cannot be 
reconciled with the EU’s position, which clearly labels Hamas as a terrorist organisation. 
Türkiye constructively contributed to mediation efforts in the Gaza ceasefire and 
participated in the Gaza peace summit in Sharm El-Sheikh, co-signing the declaration on 13 
October 2025. On Syria, following the fall of the Assad regime in December 2024, Türkiye 
increased its leverage over developments in the country significantly. Türkiye engaged 
heavily with stakeholders to support the transition, strongly advocating the lifting of EU and 
US sanctions. Türkiye maintained a strategic partnership with China, seeking opportunities 
to strengthen economic and investment links, increase bilateral trade and reduce trade 
imbalances, while also engaging in consultations on major regional and global issues.  
Under the common security and defence policy, Türkiye continued to actively participate in 
and substantially contribute to EU crisis management missions and operations.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented, and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular:  
→ urgently and significantly improve alignment with the High Representative’s statements 
on behalf of the EU and relevant Council decisions on sanctions;  
→ continue its efforts to detect and prevent circumvention of restrictive measures, in 
particular on advanced technology items used for military purposes by Russia; extend its 
measures to prevent re-export the economically critical goods; and address risks linked 
with Russia’s ‘Shadow Fleet’ in terms of maritime and environmental safety; 
→ continue to engage in a more structured and frequent political dialogue on foreign and 
security policy with the EU and seek collaboration on convergent interests while working 
on reducing divergences.