3 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION1  
1.1.  
CONTEXT 
Türkiye is a key partner for the European Union and a candidate country. In April 2024, the 
European Council reiterated the EU’s strategic interest in a stable and secure environment in 
the Eastern Mediterranean and in the development of a cooperative and mutually beneficial 
relationship with Türkiye. In this regard, the European Council stressed that the European 
Union attaches particular importance to resumption of and progress in the Cyprus 
settlement talks in further enhancing EU-Türkiye cooperation. Both the EU and Türkiye 
pursue re-engagement in areas of mutual interest, in line with the recommendations of the 
Joint Communication on EU-Türkiye relations from 23 November 20232 and the relevant 
European Council Conclusions3. The EU is re-engaging constructively with Türkiye in a 
phased, proportionate and reversible manner, subject to established conditionalities. High-
level engagement continued in areas of joint interest4.  
Accession negotiations with Türkiye have remained at a standstill since 2018, in line with the 
European Council Conclusions. The EU’s serious concerns about the continued deterioration 
of democratic standards, the rule of law, the independence of the judiciary and respect for 
fundamental rights were not addressed.  
The 2016 EU-Turkey Statement continued to yield results and remained the key framework 
for cooperation on migration. Türkiye sustained its remarkable efforts to host 3.6 million 
refugees from Syria and other countries. The EU has mobilised EUR 10 billion to support 
refugees and host communities since 2011. The Commission continued to provide 
assistance in areas such as basic needs, border management, education, healthcare, 
protection and socio-economic support. On the economic side, Türkiye became the EU’s fifth 
largest trading partner in 2023, with trade exceeding EUR 206 billion.  
Since 2023, bilateral relations between Türkiye and Greece have improved, with Türkiye not 
engaging in any unauthorised drilling activities in the Eastern Mediterranean or in flights over 
Greek islands. Türkiye continued to refuse to recognise the Republic of Cyprus and 
repeatedly advocated a two-state solution in Cyprus, contrary to relevant UN Security 
Council Resolutions.  
 
 
 
1  is presented in a renewed format and structure. Main findings of the report, together with the 
recommendations (previously grey assessment boxes) are brought together at the beginning of the report. 
Furthermore, under the fundamentals cluster, for better readability and comparability across all reports, certain 
data is provided (also) in the form of graphs. 
2 JOIN(2023) 50 final 
3 During the reporting period the European Council adopted Conclusions regarding Türkiye on 30 June 2023 and 
on 17 April 2024; 
4 EU-Türkiye High Level Dialogue on Migration and Security and EU-Türkiye High Level Dialogue on Agriculture 
took place in November 2023 in Brussels; EU-Türkiye High Level Dialogue on Health and EU-Türkiye High Level 
Dialogue on Science, Research, Technology and Innovation took place in April 2024 in Ankara; EU-Türkiye High 
Level Dialogue on Trade took place in July 2024 in Brussels. 
 
4 
 
1.2. MAIN FINDINGS OF THE REPORT5 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
Democracy 
Despite certain shortcomings observed in the electoral campaign, local elections in Türkiye 
in March 2024 were well organised overall and respected the will of the people. 
The presidential system has largely weakened the Turkish Parliament’s legislative and 
oversight functions. It lacks the tools needed to hold the government to account. 
The institutions in charge of the integration process are in place. The main responsible body 
is the Directorate for EU Affairs, under the responsibility of a Deputy Minister. 
The presidential system continues to be characterised by a lack of checks and balances. 
Most regulatory authorities remain directly linked to the Presidency, while public 
administration is highly politicised. The government’s pressure on mayors from opposition 
parties continued to weaken local democracy. 
Civil society organisations (CSOs) in Türkiye operate in a difficult environment facing  
shrinking space to operate and multiple constraints, including continuous pressure from the 
authorities. Despite that, civil society continued to be vocal and participate actively in civic 
life, making crucial contributions in several areas. Mechanisms to ensure that independent 
CSOs are consulted on new legislation and policies need to be put in place. 
Public administration reform 
Türkiye is between having some level of preparation and a moderate level of preparation 
and made no progress in the reporting period.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular:  
→ prepare and adopt an overarching strategy for public administration and public financial 
management reform in line with the EU principles and after extensive consultations; 
→ introduce merit-based recruitment, appointments and promotions, notably to senior 
positions; 
→ review the policymaking process to achieve inclusive and evidence-based methods of 
preparing policy planning documents and legislative proposals. 
Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights 
Türkiye remains at an early stage of preparation in the area of the rule of law and 
fundamental rights. No progress was made on key issues identified in previous reports and 
serious concerns remain. 
Functioning of the judiciary 
 
5 This report covers the period from 15 June 2023 to 1 September 2024. It is based on input from a variety of 
sources, including contributions from the government of Türkiye, EU Member States, European Parliament 
reports and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also includes the 
results of comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule 
of law.  
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of 
preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made 
during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, 
good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been used. 
 
 
5 
 
Türkiye remains at an early stage of preparation in this area and no progress has been 
made. Despite the adoption of new judicial reform packages, the fundamental shortcomings 
in the functioning of the judiciary remained unaddressed. Türkiye continued to refuse to 
implement certain judgments of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR). Undue 
pressure by the authorities on judges and prosecutors continued to have a negative effect 
on the independence and quality of the judiciary. Serious efforts are needed to significantly 
improve the functioning of the country’s judicial system.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ create a political and legal environment in line with European standards that allows the 
judiciary to carry out its duties independently and impartially, strengthen the separation 
of powers, and ensure that lower courts respect judgments by the Constitutional Court, 
whose decisions should abide by ECtHR jurisprudence; 
→ amend the structure and process of selecting the members of the Council of Judges and 
Prosecutors (HSK) so that the role and influence of the executive is limited, and 
introduce safeguards against any interference by the HSK or high-level officials in 
judicial proceedings; 
→ ensure that all judicial proceedings respect fundamental rights including in particular, the 
rights of victims of crime and the procedural rights for suspects and accused persons in 
criminal proceedings, duly guarantee the presumption of innocence, the principles of 
individual criminal responsibility and legal certainty, the right of defence, and the right to 
a fair trial. 
Fight against corruption 
Türkiye is still at an early stage of preparation in the fight against corruption and no 
progress has been made in the reporting period. The country has not taken steps to 
establish a framework for prevention and control or to set up anti-corruption bodies in 
accordance with the Council of Europe’s Civil and Criminal Law Conventions on Corruption, 
the Group of States against Corruption (GRECO) recommendations, and the UN Convention 
against Corruption. The legal framework and institutional structure require improvement to 
limit undue political influence in prosecuting and adjudicating corruption cases. Public 
institutions need to improve their accountability and transparency. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ implement its international obligations in relation to the fight against corruption, in 
particular the UN Convention against Corruption and the relevant Council of Europe 
Conventions; 
→ ensure effective follow-up of the recommendations issued by GRECO, including by 
adopting the necessary legislation;  
→ develop an anti-corruption strategy that reflects a clear political will and vision to 
effectively address corruption, underpinned by a credible and realistic action plan. 
Fundamental rights 
The overall human rights situation in the country has not improved and remains an issue of 
concern. The Turkish legal framework includes general guarantees for the respect of human 
and fundamental rights, but the legislation and its implementation need to be brought into 
line with the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and ECtHR case law. Trials and 
 
6 
 
convictions of journalists, writers, lawyers, academics, human rights defenders and other 
critical voices for alleged support for terrorism have continued. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ align its anti-terror legislation and its implementation, as well as practices against 
terrorism with European standards, the ECHR, ECtHR case law, and the Venice 
Commission’s recommendations, and the EU acquis and practices;  
→ improve the legislative framework and its implementation in order to effectively tackle all 
forms of violence against women;  
→ effectively tackle all forms of racism and discrimination, including against LGBTIQ 
persons, and ensure the protection of minorities;  
→ implement the ECtHR judgments as a matter of priority, including in the case of Kavala 
vs Türkiye. 
Freedom of expression 
Türkiye remains at an early stage of preparation in this area and no progress was made 
during the reporting period and serious concerns remain. The implementation of criminal 
laws related to national security and counter-terrorism continued to violate the ECHR and to 
diverge from the case law of the ECtHR, hindering freedom of expression.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ release journalists, human rights defenders, lawyers, writers and academics being held in 
pre-trial detention and ensure that the criminal cases against them are concluded in 
accordance with the criteria set by the ECHR and the ECtHR;  
→ revise its criminal legislation, in particular the anti-terror law, the Criminal Code, the data 
protection law, the internet law, the new media law in relation to the definition of ‘fake 
news’, and the Radio and Television Supreme Council law, to ensure that they comply 
with European standards and are implemented in a proportionate manner that does not 
curtail freedom of expression; 
→ ensure a safe and pluralist environment that enables the media to carry out their work 
independently and without fear of reprisals or dismissals.  
Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security 
Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of justice, freedom and security. Some progress 
was made in relation to the further strengthening of the surveillance and protection capacity 
of the land border with Iran. Türkiye continued to make significant efforts to host and 
support 3.6 million refugees.  
Most of last year’s recommendations still need to be addressed and remain valid. In the 
coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ fully implement the EU-Turkey Statement of March 2016, notably resume the returns 
from the Greek islands, and implement all the provisions of the EU-Turkey Readmission 
Agreement towards all EU Member States; 
→ align legislation on personal data protection with the EU acquis, facilitating the 
conclusion of an international agreement on the exchange of personal data between 
Europol and Türkiye; 
 
7 
 
→ adopt and implement a strategy and action plan on border management to improve 
coordination between border services at national and international levels. 
Fight against organised crime 
Türkiye has some level of preparation in implementing the EU acquis in this area. Limited 
progress was made overall in alignment with the acquis and practices in certain fields. 
Progress was made in addressing the remaining items of the Financial Action Task Force’s 
(FATF) Action Plan, and the country was removed from the FATF’s ‘grey list’.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year mostly remain valid. In the coming year, 
Türkiye should in particular: 
→ continue to improve the legal framework and practices on counterterrorism in line with 
the EU acquis, and strengthen its regime on anti-money laundering, terrorist financing 
and financing of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in line with the 
recommendations of the Venice Commission; 
→ conclude an international agreement with the EU on cooperation with Eurojust, and 
further increase its operational willingness to cooperate and exchange information with 
EU law enforcement partners and engage in adequate judicial cooperation with EU 
Member States; 
→ improve its legislation on witness protection and data protection. 
 
ECONOMIC CRITERIA 
The existence of a functioning market economy 
Türkiye is well advanced in establishing a functioning market economy and made some 
progress over the reporting period. 
A welcome shift to a much tighter monetary policy stance helped curb external imbalances 
and domestic demand moderated. Inflationary pressures and inflation declined, although it 
remained very high. Employment increased, but the labour market still faces major structural 
challenges. The budget deficit rose partly due to post-earthquake reconstruction spending, 
despite some consolidation measures. While still facing significant challenges, the banking 
sector adapted relatively smoothly to the changing policy environment. The authorities took 
steps to improve the business environment, but transparency and predictability remained a 
concern. State aid transparency and control also remained weak. 
The Commission’s recommendations from 2023 were not fully implemented, and therefore 
remain valid. To improve the functioning of the market economy, Türkiye should in 
particular: 
→ maintain a tight monetary policy stance until the disinflation process is firmly 
established; 
→ use any revenue overperformance as well as fiscal buffers on the expenditure side to 
further reduce the budget deficit; 
→ further improve the business environment by reducing state interference in price-setting 
mechanisms, preventing State aid that distorts competition, and increasing State aid 
transparency. 
The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union 
Türkiye has a good level of preparation and made limited progress in its capacity to cope 
with competitive pressure and market forces within the EU. 
 
8 
 
The economy is diversified, with a well-developed service sector and strong manufacturing 
and agriculture sectors. Efforts to improve human capital continued, but the skills mismatch 
remained a key concern. Investment activity increased significantly in 2023, with further 
steps to advance digitalisation and the greening of the economy. Economic integration with 
the EU remains high. 
The Commission’s recommendations from 2023 were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. To improve competitiveness and support long-term growth, Türkiye 
should in particular: 
→ further tailor education and training to labour market needs, improve the quality and 
access to vocational education and training (VET) and support the school-to-work 
transition; 
→ continue efforts to diversify energy supplies and increase the share of renewables in the 
energy mix;  
→ improve SMEs’ access to long-term finance. 
Chapter 5: Public procurement 
Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of public procurement, with significant gaps 
remaining to align with the EU acquis. It made no progress in this area over the reporting 
period and the lack of transparency and discriminatory domestic price advantages 
continued.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ revise its public procurement legislation to further align it with the 2014 Directives on 
public procurement, including utilities, concessions and public-private partnerships, and 
increase transparency; 
→ reduce the excessive use of the negotiated procedure that distorts competition and limits 
transparency, and improve instruments to evaluate contract performance and benchmark 
effectiveness of public procurement procedures and contract management; 
→ repeal exemptions that are incompatible with the EU acquis and refrain from the use of 
discriminatory domestic price advantages and offset practices. 
Chapter 18: Statistics 
Türkiye is moderately prepared on statistics and made some progress in the reporting 
period. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ set transparent, professional criteria for the appointment of the President of TurkStat and 
any grounds for dismissal, which cannot compromise TurkStat’s professional or 
scientific independence; 
→ continue aligning national accounts with the European System of Accounts 2010 (ESA 
2010) and the requirements of the ESA 2010 transmission programme; 
→ improve statistics on agriculture (including preparations for the agricultural census), 
migration and asylum, and continue its work towards full alignment with the new 
requirements on short-term business statistics. 
Chapter 32: Financial control 
Türkiye has a good level of preparation on financial control. It made no progress throughout 
 
9 
 
the reporting period.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ organise a new round of public expenditure and financial accountability (PEFA) to assess 
the performance of the current public finance management, update the public internal 
financial control policy paper and the related action plan, and help prepare a 
comprehensive public financial management strategy;  
→ adopt a national anti-fraud strategy; 
→  review the arrangements for including municipalities and state-owned enterprises in the 
treasury single account. 
 
CLUSTER 2: INTERNAL MARKET 
Chapter 1: Free movement of goods 
Türkiye has a good level of preparation on the free movement of goods. It made some 
progress in aligning with the EU harmonised product acquis and in resolving barriers likely to 
affect the free movement of goods in the internal market during the reporting period. The 
Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ continue to eliminate non-tariff barriers to the free movement of goods that are in breach 
of Customs Union obligations; in particular, address priority barriers as identified in the 
context of the High Level Dialogue on Trade; 
→ increase the coverage and effectiveness of market surveillance measures. 
Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers 
Preparations in the area of the freedom of movement for workers are at an early stage and 
no progress was made during the reporting period. In the coming year, Türkiye should in 
particular: 
→ prepare legislation and administrative practices in view of joining the European 
Employment Services (EURES) network. 
Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services 
Preparations in the area of the right of establishment and freedom to provide services are at 
an early stage. There was no progress in the reporting period and substantial efforts are still 
required to achieve alignment in this area.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ align its national legislation with the Services Directive and set up a point of single 
contact; 
→ continue aligning with the EU postal acquis, including the regulation on cross-border 
parcel delivery services; 
→ align its national legislation with the EU acquis on mutual recognition of professional 
qualifications, including the Proportionality Test Directive. 
Chapter 4: Free movement of capital 
Türkiye is moderately prepared on free movement of capital. Overall, there was some 
 
10 
 
progress in this area in the reporting period, notably the fight against money laundering and 
terrorist financing. The country made significant progress in addressing the remaining items 
of the Financial Action Task Force’s (FATF) Action Plan, leading to its removal from the 
FATF’s ‘grey list’. While some steps have been taken, limitations on foreign ownership and 
capital movements persist in numerous sectors. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were implemented to some extent and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ minimise limitations on foreign ownership and capital movements; 
→ continue alignment with the EU acquis by strengthening measures to combat money 
laundering and the financing of terrorism, ensuring that lawyers are included as obliged 
entities, and addressing the concerns raised in the relevant Constitutional Court decision 
of April 2024. 
Chapter 6: Company law 
Türkiye is well advanced in the area of company law. Some progress was made during the 
reporting period by adopting the corporate sustainability reporting standards and 
introducing the use of digital tools and processes in company law.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not fully met and remain valid. In 
the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ further align national legislation with the EU acquis on encouragement of long-term 
shareholder engagement; 
→ align national legislation with the EU acquis on cross-border conversions, mergers and 
divisions; 
→ put arrangements in place for company reporting, including as regards the corporate 
sustainability reporting and the disclosure of income tax information (country by country 
reporting). 
Chapter 7: Intellectual property law 
Türkiye has a good level of preparation in the area of intellectual property law. However, no 
progress was made during the reporting period. Some legislative discrepancies remain, as 
well as outstanding problems with implementation and enforcement, notably in relation with 
judicial procedures.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ improve enforcement measures to efficiently fight IPR infringements, including online 
sales of counterfeit and pirated goods, improve the level of IPR specialisation of judges 
and resolve difficulties in the judicial procedures to obtain search and seizure warrants 
for criminal law enforcement; 
→ improve cooperation with IPR rights holders for efficient implementation and effective 
enforcement, in particular in cases of accelerated and simplified destruction procedures 
by the judiciary and customs authorities; 
→ ensure the collection and processing of accurate statistical data, especially on the 
effective judicial enforcement of intellectual and industrial property rights, with a view to 
facilitating the analysis of systemic IPR shortcomings. 
Chapter 8: Competition policy 
Türkiye has some level of preparation in the area of competition policy. It made no progress 
 
11 
 
in this area over the reporting period and concerns remain in the area of State aid.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ ensure the independence and functionality of the State aid institutional framework in 
accordance with the EU acquis; 
→ implement the State aid law by adopting implementing legislation without further delay; 
→ make available a transparent and up-to-date inventory of all aid schemes. 
Chapter 9: Financial services 
Türkiye has a good level of preparation in the area of financial services. It made some 
progress in the reporting period by starting to unwind the disruptive macroprudential and 
regulatory measures in the financial sector. Türkiye took some steps to provide more 
flexibility in the private pension system as well as in the capital markets. Work is ongoing to 
promote sustainable and digital finance. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ continue efforts to align with revised CRR/CRD and BRRD frameworks; 
→ continue phasing out the distortive macroprudential and regulatory measures and 
improve the transparency of the asset quality review; 
→ continue efforts in EU acquis alignment related to capital markets and financial market 
infrastructures. 
Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection 
Türkiye has a good level of preparation on consumer and health protection. Limited 
progress was made in strengthening its surveillance system for health services and tackling 
serious cross-border health threats, as well as on the de-institutionalisation of mental health 
services.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ strengthen consumer rights enforcement and further improve coordination and 
cooperation with the consumer movement and with enforcement bodies; increase 
awareness raising activities, take more measures on infringements in the digital 
environment and introduce more measures to support vulnerable consumers; 
→ strengthen its primary healthcare services by providing sufficient resources for the risk 
assessment of public health emergencies and risk management at central and provincial 
levels; 
→ boost its workforce and administrative capacity to ensure effective multi-sectoral 
preparedness and response to disasters within and across the relevant sectors. 
 
CLUSTER 3: COMPETITIVENESS AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH 
Chapter 10: Digital transformation and media 
Türkiye has some level of preparation in this area. Limited progress was made during the 
reporting period. Concerns persist over the lack of sufficient competition, the concentration 
of media ownership and the lack of financial and administrative independence of regulatory 
 
12 
 
authorities.  
The Commission’s recommendations from the last few years were only partially 
implemented and therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ align the universal service, authorisation arrangements, market access and rights of way 
in electronic communications with the EU acquis; 
→ strengthen the independence of the regulatory authority and its board members, and 
amend the Internet Law in line with the Venice Commission’s recommendations to 
ensure media pluralism; 
→ take steps to strengthen the public broadcaster’s independence. 
Chapter 16: Taxation 
Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of taxation. It made no progress over the 
reporting period.  
The Commission's recommendations from last year were not met and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ enable the automatic exchange of tax information with all EU Member States; 
→ continue to align its legislation on VAT and excise duties, notably the range of excisable 
energy products with the EU acquis; 
→ continue the fight against the informal economy and report on progress transparently by 
using performance indicators. 
Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy 
Türkiye has some level of preparation and made good progress on economic and monetary 
policy. A process of policy normalisation started under the new government after the 
parliamentary and presidential elections in May 2023. The central bank significantly 
tightened the monetary policy stance, reinstating the policy rate as the primary instrument of 
monetary policy. Decisive steps were also taken to simplify the prudential and regulatory 
measures, which helped strengthen the monetary transmission mechanism. Türkiye also 
made improvements to the excessive deficit procedure, data availability and timeliness. 
The Commission’ recommendations from last year were met to a large extent. In the coming 
year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ further strengthen the functional independence of the central bank and maintain a tight 
monetary policy stance until the disinflation process firms up; 
→ continue to simplify the macroprudential framework under a transparent monetary policy 
framework and more effective communication. 
Chapter 19: Social policy and employment 
Türkiye has some level of preparation on social policy and employment. It made no 
progress over the reporting period. The labour market situation improved, but concerns 
remain over trade union rights, persistent levels of informal employment, the gender gap in 
the labour market and income inequalities. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
mostly remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ remove obstacles that limit the exercise of trade union and collective bargaining rights 
through effective use of social dialogue mechanisms; 
→ tackle emerging challenges in health and safety at work, particularly in relation to fatal 
 
13 
 
incidents in the construction and mining sectors, as well as plastic waste recycling; 
→ increase the employment rate of women and young people by adopting effective active 
labour market policies and expanding affordable care services. 
Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy 
Türkiye is moderately prepared on enterprise and industrial policy. It made some progress 
over the reporting period by ending localisation and prioritisation requirements for 
pharmaceuticals, and by adopting new strategy documents and impact assessments. 
However, concerns persist that the public procurement practices are incompatible with EU 
industrial policy principles. There are also concerns over the lack of transparency in State 
aid for large investments and the large informal economy.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular:  
→ remove public procurement price premiums that are incompatible with industrial policy 
principles and substitute them with measures that encourage innovation in an effective 
way;  
→ publish the results of implementation of the industry strategy from 2019 to 2021 as well 
as the amounts distributed under the industry support programme;  
→ continue assessing the impact of the SME support framework and reduce gaps and 
overlaps.  
Chapter 25: Science and research 
Overall, Türkiye’s preparation in the area of science and research is well advanced. Türkiye 
made some progress during the reporting period, notably linked to participation in Horizon 
Europe and continued actions to raise awareness of and capacity for the programme. There 
is good, active and expanding cooperation between the EU and Türkiye on research and 
innovation.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partly met and remain largely 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ step up efforts to increase innovation and remedy the increasing performance gap 
between Türkiye and the EU in the  European Innovation Scoreboard rankings. 
Chapter 26: Education and culture 
Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of education and culture. There was limited 
progress on education, notably in the vocational education and national qualification 
systems. There was limited progress in the field of culture. Türkiye recognises the value of 
culture in national development policies and encourages the promotion and protection of its 
cultural heritage. 
The Commission’s previous recommendations were not met and therefore remain valid. In 
the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ further improve inclusive education, with a particular focus on girls and children from 
disadvantaged groups, and closely monitor and continue work to reduce the proportion 
of school dropouts; 
→ ensure the proper functioning of the Turkish Qualifications Framework and Turkish 
Higher Education Quality Council; 
→ continue taking steps to implement the 2005 UNESCO Convention on the Protection and 
Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions. 
 
14 
 
Chapter 29: Customs Union 
Türkiye maintains a good level of preparation for the Customs Union. It made some 
progress in the reporting period. Türkiye tackled a few long-standing trade barriers, partially 
removing some import and export restrictions. Duty relief, free zones and the surveillance 
scheme are still not fully aligned with the EU acquis, and are in breach of the Customs Union 
provisions. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not fully met and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ step up efforts to fully align new legislation with the EU Customs Code and bring risk-
based controls and simplified procedures in line with the EU acquis; 
→ Strengthen the controls and cooperate with the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) in 
administrative investigations in cases of transhipment or simple transformation of 
goods in the country leading to the false declaration of origin of goods at import into the 
EU  
→ continue to eliminate import and export restrictions as well as additional duties on 
goods in free circulation in the EU-Turkey Customs Union. 
 
CLUSTER 4: THE GREEN AGENDA AND SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY 
Chapter 14: Transport policy 
Türkiye is moderately prepared on transport policy. Some progress was made in the 
reporting period as Türkiye accelerated its efforts to decarbonise the transport sector by 
2053. 
However, the subsidies to the incumbent railway operator and the lack of financial 
independence of the transport operator from infrastructure manager TCDD remain major 
issues. Adoption of the railway framework law was further delayed. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not fully met and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ consider measures for proper monitoring combined with possible feasibility schemes for 
the uptake of new and green technologies for alternative fuels in Türkiye; 
→ consider establishing tools and capacity building at private and public level for transport 
decarbonisation starting with aviation and maritime transport, and set interim targets; 
→ finalise and publish its first white paper on sustainable urban mobility planning including 
disaster aspects as part of the evolving Sustainable Urban Mobility Plans (SUMPs), while 
improving policy dialogue and increasing coordination between local and central 
authorities. 
Chapter 15: Energy 
Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of energy. Limited progress was made, with the 
roll-out of renewable energy deployment and the adoption of the National Energy Efficiency 
Strategy and Roadmap. Nonetheless, local content requirement practices in the renewable 
energy sector remained in place. Türkiye’s legislative changes related to the natural gas 
market do not yet ensure compatibility with the EU’s third energy package. Overall, energy 
dependence on Russia continued. Türkiye continued to make efforts on the legislative 
alignment of nuclear safety regulations. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were only partially implemented. In the 
 
15 
 
coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ deepen natural gas market reform by setting up a legally binding plan and timetable for 
unbundling activities and updating the natural gas market law to ensure it is compatible 
with the EU’s third energy package; 
→ complete the legislative alignment of nuclear safety and stress tests on the Akkuyu 
nuclear power plant; 
→ discontinue local content requirement practices in the renewable energy sector, as such 
practices contradict WTO and EU-Turkey Customs Union rules. 
Chapter 21: Trans-European networks 
Türkiye is well advanced on trans-European networks. It made limited progress during the 
reporting period. On transport networks, construction of the Halkali-Kapikule railway 
advanced.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year remain valid. In the coming year, 
Türkiye should in particular: 
→ establish a transparent, cost-reflective and non-discriminatory gas transit regime in line 
with the EU acquis; 
→ take concrete steps to prepare the Yavuz Sultan Selim Bridge railway connections;  
→ accelerate action to align with key pieces of the EU acquis to facilitate alignment in the 
TEN-T networks. 
Chapter 27: Environment and climate change 
Türkiye has some level of preparation and made limited progress over the reporting period 
in this area. In the area of environment, Türkiye took some steps on water quality. On climate 
change, Türkiye adopted both the renewed Climate Change Mitigation Strategy and Action 
Plan (2024-2030) and the renewed Climate Change Adaptation Strategy.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ ensure that environmental standards are met when building back better in the 
earthquake-affected areas, notably through full implementation of the Environmental 
Impact Assessment Directive and other horizontal environmental legislation; 
→  complete alignment with the directives on industrial pollution, water and waste as well as 
on nature protection and air quality, while ensuring that protection from exposure to 
asbestos in earthquake-affected areas is duly implemented; 
→ complete its alignment with the EU acquis on climate action, notably but not limited to 
emissions trading, and finalise the pending contributions required under the Paris 
Agreement on climate change.  
 
CLUSTER 5: RESOURCES, AGRICULTURE AND COHESION 
Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development 
Türkiye has some level of preparation on agriculture and rural development. Limited 
progress was made. Türkiye’s agricultural support policy continued to move away from the 
principles of the EU common agricultural policy. Good progress was made on the 
implementation of IPARD, with its coverage extended to the whole country and a signiﬁcant 
absorption of funds.  
 
16 
 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented. In the 
coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ align legislation to the EU acquis notably on the agricultural support policy with the EU 
acquis;  
→ set up a farmer sustainability data network (FSDN) and the integrated administration and 
control system (IACS); 
→ pursue the opening and transparent management of import quotas for beef and live 
bovine animals on a lasting basis. 
Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy 
Türkiye has some level of preparation in the area of food safety, veterinary and 
phytosanitary policy. Overall, it achieved no progress in this area over the reporting period. 
On food safety, it has yet to upgrade food establishments to meet EU standards. Full 
implementation of the EU acquis in this area requires significant work. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ upgrade food establishments to meet EU standards, notably for raw milk; 
→ meet EU maximum limits for pesticide residues, and effectively address recurrent 
shortcomings; 
→  integrate the EU’s One Health approach into the zoonosis control system. 
Chapter 13: Fisheries and aquaculture 
Türkiye is moderately prepared in this area. It made some progress on resources 
conservation and fleet management by improving the legislative framework. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were partially implemented and 
therefore remain valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ step up efforts to align fisheries management with EU law, notably data collection and 
data sharing for scientific advice in support of sustainable fisheries management; 
→ step up efforts to align its market policy with EU rules, in particular on the criteria 
governing the recognition and roles of professional organisations; 
→ continue improving fisheries control and inspection at sea in line with the revised EU 
standards to ensure a good level of  compliance in the Mediterranean Sea, and make a 
significant effort to improve and address the fight against illegal, unreported and 
unregulated fishing activities, including catch documentation schemes. 
Chapter 22: Regional policy and the coordination of structural instruments 
Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of regional policy and the coordination of 
structural instruments. There was some progress in programming and financial 
management. 
The Commission’s recommendations from last year remain valid. In the coming year, 
Türkiye should in particular: 
→ address structural weaknesses in regional policy implementation; 
→ improve monitoring of the ongoing operations under the Instrument for Pre-accession 
Assistance (IPA II) and accelerate programming under IPA III; 
 
17 
 
→ ensure the proper functioning of local democracy and more balanced regional 
development. 
Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions 
Türkiye has some level of preparation in the area of financial and budgetary provisions. It 
made no progress over the reporting period.  
The Commission’s recommendation from last year was not met and therefore remains valid. 
In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ further align the gross national income inventory with Eurostat’s GNI Inventory Guide. 
 
CLUSTER 6: EXTERNAL RELATIONS 
Chapter 30: External relations 
Türkiye is moderately prepared on external relations. It made some progress over the 
reporting period.  
The Commission’s recommendations from last year were not met and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular: 
→ fully realign the customs tariff with the Common Customs Tariff; 
→ complete the alignment with the EU’s Generalised Scheme of Preferences and dual-use 
export control regime; 
→ address priority barriers to trade, as identified in the context of the High-Level Dialogue 
on Trade. 
Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy 
Türkiye has some level of preparation in the area of common foreign security and defence 
policy (CFSP), and made no progress overall in the reporting period. Türkiye is an active and 
signiﬁcant player in the area of foreign policy, which constitutes a pivotal aspect of EU-
Türkiye relations. However, its foreign policy remained at odds with the EU’s priorities under 
the CFSP, notably due to the lack of alignment with EU sanctions against Russia and the 
labelling of Hamas, listed as a terrorist organisation by the EU. Under the common security 
and defence policy (CSDP), Türkiye continued to actively participate and substantially 
contribute to EU crisis management missions and operations.  
Türkiye’s foreign policy continued its ‘360-degree’ strategic outlook, without major shifting 
but with an updated vision. While claiming that it remains committed to EU membership.  
Türkiye has embarked on a comprehensive vision in the diplomatic, economic, security and 
defense spheres, diversifying partnerships and asserting its strategic autonomy.  
Türkiye intensiﬁed relations with countries in Africa, Asia, the Gulf and Latin America, while 
increasing its regional normalisation efforts with the Arab states and Armenia. On Russia’s 
war of aggression against Ukraine, Türkiye supported the sovereignty and territorial integrity 
of Ukraine and engaged politically, economically and diplomatically with both Russia and 
Ukraine. Nevertheless, Türkiye continued to refrain from aligning with the EU’s restrictive 
measures against Russia, and signiﬁcantly intensiﬁed its trade, economic and energy ties 
with Russia. EU-Türkiye cooperation on countering the circumvention of sanctions against 
Russia via Turkish territory continued, delivering some results. 
Following the Hamas terrorist attack against Israel on 7 October 2023, Türkiye did not 
condemn the terrorist attack and took a stance in support of Hamas, which is in complete 
disagreement with the EU’s position. On the Middle East Peace Process, Türkiye aligns with 
 
18 
 
the EU’s position on the need to relaunch the political process in order to implement the two-
state solution.  
The recommendations from last year were only partially implemented and therefore remain 
valid. In the coming year, Türkiye should in particular:  
→ signiﬁcantly improve alignment with the High Representative’s statements on behalf of 
the EU and relevant Council decisions on CFSP;  
→ increase its efforts on preventing and detecting the circumvention of restrictive 
measures, in particular on advanced technology items used for military purposes by 
Russia; 
→ constructively engage in a more structured and frequent political dialogue on foreign and 
security policy with the EU and seek collaboration on convergent interests while working 
on reducing divergences.