2 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION  
1.1.  
CONTEXT 
Turkey remains a key partner for the European Union. Turkey has been linked to the EU by 
an Association Agreement since 1964 and a Customs Union was established in 1995. The 
European Council granted Turkey the status of candidate country in December 1999 and 
accession negotiations were opened in October 2005. Within the framework of accession 
negotiations, 16 chapters have been opened and one of these was provisionally closed. The 
General Affairs Council conclusions of June 2019 reiterated the Council’s position of June 
2018 that under the current circumstances, Turkey’s accession negotiations have effectively 
come to a standstill, no further chapters can be considered for opening or closing1. Over the 
reporting period, the Turkish government did not reverse the negative trend as regards the 
reform agenda despite the Turkish government’s repeated commitment to the objective of EU 
accession. The EU’s serious concerns on the continued deterioration of democracy, the rule of 
law, fundamental rights and the independence of the judiciary have not been addressed. There 
was further backsliding in many areas.  
Relations with the EU deteriorated until December 2020, mostly due to actions taken by 
Turkey in the Eastern Mediterranean, directly challenging the rights of the Republic of 
Cyprus in its maritime zones. In addition, there was a sharp increase in provocative action 
taken by Turkey against Greece, a failure to advance in the Cyprus settlement process, and 
assertive action by Turkey in most of the surrounding regional conflicts, in ways that often 
were at odds with broader EU interests. Two individuals remain listed under the November 
2019 framework for restrictive measures for Turkey’s unauthorised drilling activities in the 
Eastern Mediterranean2. The duration of this framework was extended by an additional year 
in November 20203.  
Tensions in the Eastern Mediterranean eased in the beginning of 2021. The EU re-affirmed 
that it has a strategic interest in a stable and secure environment in the Eastern Mediterranean 
and in the development of a cooperative and mutually beneficial relationship with Turkey. 
The EU offered to nurture a more positive dynamic in EU-Turkey relations by expressing 
readiness to engage with Turkey in a phased, proportionate and reversible manner in a number 
of areas of common interest, subject to the conditionalities set out by the European Council. 
In that context high level dialogues were held on climate and migration and security to be 
followed by the dialogue on health soon. At the same time, the European Union remained 
committed to defending its interests and those of its Member States and uphold regional 
stability.  
Turkey continued its enormous efforts to host the largest refugee population in the world with 
around 3.7 million Syrians under temporary protection and more than 320 000 non-Syrians, 
including those who hold or have applied for international protection status. The EU Facility 
for Refugees in Turkey contributed to these efforts, with the full EUR 6 billion operational 
budget of the Facility contracted by the end of 2020 and over EUR 4.2 billion had been 
disbursed by August 2021. In addition to the EUR 6 billion already mobilised under the EU 
Facility for Refugees, in 2020 and 2021 EUR 585 million were earmarked from the EU 
budget for humanitarian support and to continue two important cash support programmes for 
refugees. In June 2021, the Commission proposed to allocate EUR 3 billion in additional 
assistance to Syrian refugees and host communities in Turkey.  
                                                          
1 The European Council conclusions of December 2006 remain in force. 
2 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32019D1894&from=GA 
3 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32020D1657&from=EN  
 
3 
 
The March 2016 EU-Turkey Statement continued yielding results and remained the key 
framework governing cooperation on migration despite Turkey’s repeated calls to update the 
Statement. Problems arose over implementation of the Statement due to Turkey’s unilateral 
suspending returns of irregular migrants and rejected asylum seekers from the Greek islands 
from March 2020 onwards, the emergence of alternative smuggling routes to Cyprus and 
Italy.  
The reporting period continued to be marked by the detrimental impact of the global COVID-
19 pandemic. By early October, Turkey had recorded around 7.2 million cases and about 
64 000 deaths related to the pandemic. Around 71 % of the population had been fully 
vaccinated. Turkey took considerable measures to boost domestic demand and soften the 
economic repercussions of the pandemic. Since the beginning of the pandemic the EU has 
stood by Turkey and taken several measures, including by reallocating over EUR 103 million 
of EU funds to help prevent and treat COVID-19 and to mitigate the economic and social 
impact. 
1.2. SUMMARY OF THE REPORT4 5 
There are serious deficiencies in the functioning of Turkey’s democratic institutions. 
Democratic backsliding continued during the reporting period. Structural deficiencies of the 
presidential system remained in place. Key recommendations of the Council of Europe and its 
bodies remain to be addressed. The Parliament continued to lack the necessary means to hold 
the government accountable. The constitutional architecture continued to centralise powers at 
the level of the Presidency without ensuring a sound and effective separation of powers 
between the executive, legislative and the judiciary. In the absence of an effective checks and 
balances mechanism, the democratic accountability of the executive branch remains limited to 
elections. Targeting of the opposition parties continued, including by the Constitutional 
Court’s acceptance of an indictment by the Chief Public Prosecutor of the Court of Cassation 
seeking to close down the second largest opposition party, which contributed to weakening 
political pluralism in Turkey. During the report period, the President dismissed the governor 
of the Central Bank twice. 
Despite ending the state of emergency in July 2018, certain legal provisions granting 
extraordinary powers to government authorities and retaining several restrictive elements 
from the emergency rule remained integrated into law, which continued to have a significant 
impact on democracy and fundamental rights. In July 2021, Turkey's parliament approved 
a bill that extends the duration of these restrictive elements of the state of emergency for one 
more year. The Inquiry Commission on the State of Emergency has not yet finalised 
examining its caseload concerning the public servants who were dismissed by decree during 
the emergency rule.  
Pressure on mayors from opposition parties by the ruling coalition government further 
weakened local democracy. Mayors from the opposition parties faced administrative and 
judicial investigations. In the south-east, the forcefully dismissed mayors continued to be 
                                                          
4 This report covers the period from June 2020 to June 2021. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from the government of Turkey, the EU Member States, European Parliament reports 
and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. This also includes the results of 
comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of law. 
5 For the state of play the report uses the following assessment scales: early stage, some level of preparation, 
moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. For progress made during the reporting 
period, the following scale has been used: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some progress, good 
progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, also interim steps have been used. 
 
 
4 
 
replaced by government-appointed trustees, denying citizens their chosen representation. In 
most cases, the incoming trustees have kept the municipal assemblies suspended. Hundreds of 
local politicians and elected office holders were arrested on terrorism-related charges. 
The situation in the south-east remained very worrying. The government carried out 
domestic and cross-border security and military operations in Iraq and Syria. The security 
situation remained precarious in border areas with recurrent terrorist acts by the Kurdistan 
Workers’ Party (PKK), which remains on the EU list of persons, groups and entities involved 
in acts of terrorism. The EU unambiguously condemned the PKK’s attacks and expressed 
solidarity with the families of the victims. While the government has a legitimate right to fight 
terrorism, it is essential that it does so in accordance with the rule of law, human rights and 
fundamental freedoms. Anti-terror measures need to be proportionate. There were no 
developments on the resumption of a credible political process to achieve a peaceful and 
sustainable solution. Human rights organisations and opposition parties reported serious 
violations of human rights by security forces. 
Around 4 000 members and officials of the People’s Democratic Party (HDP) remain in 
prison, including a number of parliamentarians. In June, the Constitutional Court accepted an 
indictment demanding the closure of the HDP, seeking a political ban for 451 HDP 
executives, including the party’s co-chairs and all past and present members of Parliament 
and executives as well as a freeze on the party’s bank accounts. There were pending requests 
by the prosecution in the Parliament to lift the immunity of almost all HDP lawmakers.  
On civil society issues, serious backsliding continued. Civil society faced continuous pressure 
and their space to operate freely has continued to diminish limiting their freedom of 
expression and freedom of association. The new law on preventing financing of proliferation 
of weapons of mass destruction raises concerns with regard to possible restrictions on the 
activities of human rights defenders and civil society. 
The legal and institutional framework governing the security and intelligence sector remained 
unchanged with reinforced civilian oversight of the security forces under the presidential 
system. The government took steps to further consolidate the civilian control of the security 
forces.  
Turkey has some level of preparation/is moderately prepared in the field of public 
administration reform. It made no progress during the reporting period. Turkey lacks 
a comprehensive public administration reform agenda and a lead institution in charge of the 
process. Concerns remained over the accountability of the administration and human 
resources management. The political will to reform is still lacking. Although policy 
coordination among central government institutions remained strong, policymaking is not 
evidence-based or participatory. The politicisation of the administration continued. Women’s 
representation remained low in the higher echelons of the bureaucracy.  
Turkey’s judicial system is at an early stage of preparation. The serious backsliding observed 
since 2016 continued. Concerns remained, in particular over the systemic lack of 
independence of the judiciary and undue pressure on judges and prosecutors. The new human 
rights action plan envisages certain positive measures but it does not address any of the key 
shortcomings related to the independence of the judiciary. In particular, no measures are 
envisaged to improve respect for the principle of the separation of powers or to improve the 
structure and the selection process of members of the Council of Judges and Prosecutors, long 
outstanding recommendations of the Council of Europe Venice Commission and the 
European Commission. Despite their acquittal, none of the judges or prosecutors dismissed 
following the coup attempt were reinstated. The lack of objective, merit-based, uniform and 
pre-established criteria for recruiting and promoting judges and prosecutors remains a source 
 
5 
 
of concern. The institution of criminal law judges of peace continued to raise concerns over 
their jurisdiction and practice. 
Regarding the fight against corruption, Turkey remained at an early stage of preparations 
and made no progress in the reporting period. The country did not establish anti-corruption 
bodies in line with Turkey’s international obligations. The flaws of the legal framework and 
institutional architecture allowed undue political influence in the investigation and 
prosecution phases of corruption cases. The accountability and transparency of public 
institutions need to be improved. The absence of an anti-corruption strategy and action plan 
indicated a lack of will to fight decisively against corruption. Most of the Council of Europe’s 
Group of States against Corruption (GRECO) recommendations have not been implemented. 
Overall, corruption is widespread and remains an issue of concern. 
Turkey has some level of preparation in the fight against organised crime and made limited 
progress. Cooperation between Europol and Turkey is based on a Strategic Agreement on 
Cooperation, which entered into force in July 2004. Negotiations concerning an international 
agreement on the exchange of personal data between Europol and the Turkish authorities 
competent for fighting serious crime and terrorism are ongoing, requiring Turkey to reform its 
legislation aligning its data protection law with the European standards. Turkey should 
improve its track record on dismantling criminal networks and confiscating criminal assets. 
The legal framework regulating the fight against money laundering and terrorist financing 
needs to be improved in line with the recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force 
(FATF) and those of the Venice Commission on the law on preventing financing of 
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Efforts are needed to improve the legislation on 
cybercrime and witness protection.  
The deterioration of human and fundamental rights continued. Many of the measures 
brought in during the state of emergency remain in force. The legal framework includes 
general guarantees of respect for human and fundamental rights but the legislation and 
practice still need to be brought into line with the European Convention on Human Rights 
(ECHR) and the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) case-law. Broad-scale 
restrictions imposed on the activities of journalists, writers, lawyers, academics, human rights 
defenders and critical voices continued to have a negative effect on the exercise of their 
freedoms and have led to self-censorship. Turkey’s refusal to implement ECtHR rulings, 
notably in the cases of Selahattin Demirtaş and Osman Kavala, further increased concerns 
regarding the judiciary’s adherence to international and European standards. Turkey’s 
withdrawal from the Istanbul Convention also put into question its commitment to such 
standards. The new human rights action plan, which promised reforms in a number of areas, 
does not address critical issues.  
Serious backsliding continued on freedom of expression. Legislation and its implementation, 
especially national security and anti-terrorism provisions, continued to contravene the 
European Convention on Human Rights and other international standards and to diverge from 
ECtHR case law. The dissemination of opposition voices and freedom of expression were 
negatively affected by the increasing pressure and restrictive measures. Criminal cases and 
convictions of journalists, human rights defenders, lawyers, writers, opposition politicians, 
students and social media users continued.  
There was further serious backsliding in the area of freedom of assembly and association in 
light of recurrent bans, disproportionate interventions and excessive use of force in peaceful 
demonstrations, investigations, administrative fines and prosecutions against demonstrators 
on charges of terrorism-related activities. Legislation and its implementation are not in line 
with the Turkish Constitution, European standards or with international conventions.  
 
6 
 
The rights of the most disadvantaged groups and of persons belonging to minorities need 
better protection. Roma remained largely excluded from formal jobs and their living 
conditions severely deteriorated. Gender-based violence, discrimination, hate speech against 
minorities, in particular against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and queer 
(LGBTIQ) persons are still a matter of serious concern.  
On migration and asylum policy, Turkey made some progress. After the incidents of March 
2020 when Turkey actively encouraged migrants and refugees to take the land route to Europe 
through Greece, the situation has eventually de-escalated. Some progress was made on 
strengthening surveillance and protection capacity of the eastern land border. The EU-Turkey 
Statement of March 2016 continued to deliver results and Turkey continued to play a key role 
in ensuring effective management of migratory flows along the eastern Mediterranean route. 
The return of irregular migrants from the Greek islands under the EU-Turkey Statement 
remained however suspended by Turkey citing COVID-19 restrictions. However, 
resettlements from Turkey to the EU resumed in July 2020 despite restrictions. Although the 
volume of irregular arrivals to Greece fell, smuggling routes to Italy and to the government-
controlled areas of Cyprus were increasingly used. Turkey has still not implemented the 
provisions relating to third-country nationals in the EU-Turkey readmission agreement, 
despite these entering into force in October 2017. Overall, the number of illegal border 
crossings between Turkey and Greece still remained significantly lower than it was prior to 
the adoption of the EU-Turkey Statement. 
Turkey continued to make significant efforts to host and meet the needs of the largest refugee 
community in the world. The full operational budget of EUR 6 billion under the Facility for 
Refugees was contracted by the end of 2020 and over EUR 4.2 billion was disbursed by 
August 2021. Efficient integration measures are necessary to address the extended presence of 
refugees in the country. Access to public health for migrants and refugees should be 
increased. No outstanding visa liberalisation benchmarks were fulfilled. Turkey still needs to 
further align its legislation with the EU acquis on visa policy.  
Turkey’s increasingly assertive foreign policy continued to collide with EU priorities under 
the CFSP, notably due to its support for military action in the Caucasus, Syria and Iraq. While 
the institutional framework enabling Turkey's participation in the CFSP and the Common 
Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) is in place, Turkey maintained a very low alignment rate 
of around 14 %. Turkey’s military support in Libya, including the deployment of foreign 
fighters on the ground, and its persistent criticism of, and lack of cooperation with Operation 
IRINI, are detrimental to the EU’s effective contribution to the UN arms embargo 
implementation, and have led to conflicting approaches on Libya. Turkey wants to see 
a stable and prosperous Syria, an objective it shares with the EU. However, Turkey pursued 
its own military action in northern Syria, including through Turkish-backed militias. At the 
same time, Turkey increased the provision of basic services and extended its infrastructure 
networks in northern Syria. 
In November 2020, the Council extended the duration of the existing framework for 
restrictive measures in response to Turkey’s unauthorised drilling activities in the Eastern 
Mediterranean. In its conclusions of December 2020, the European Council strongly 
condemned Turkey’s unilateral actions, provocations and escalated rhetoric against the EU, 
EU Member States and European Leaders. The tensions in the Eastern Mediterranean 
decreased as from the beginning of 2021. Turkey stopped its illegal hydrocarbon exploration 
activities in the maritime zones  of Greece and Cyprus. However, in early October Turkish 
warships obstructed the vessel Nautical Geo from conducting a survey in the Cypriot 
Exclusive Economic Zone, and Turkey issued a NAVTEX for conducting seismic surveys 
which would encompass parts of Cyprus’ EEZ. Furthermore, Turkey continued undertaking 
 
7 
 
actions towards changing the status of the fenced-off city of Varosha with unacceptable 
unilateral decisions which go against the relevant UN SC Resolutions 550 (1984) and 789 
(1992). The EU has strongly condemned Turkey’s unilateral steps and the unacceptable 
announcements made by the Turkish President and the leader of the Turkish Cypriot 
community on 20 July 2021 on the further reopening of the fenced-off town of Varosha in 
Cyprus, and called for the immediate reversal of these actions and the reversal of all steps 
taken on Varosha since October 2020. 
The EU has repeatedly stressed the need for Turkey to respect the sovereign rights of EU 
Member States, which include entering into bilateral agreements and exploring and exploiting 
their natural resources in accordance with the EU acquis and international law, including the 
UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. Turkey needs to commit itself unequivocally to good 
neighbourly relations, international agreements and to the peaceful settlement of disputes in 
accordance with the United Nations Charter, having recourse, if necessary, to the International 
Court of Justice.  
Turkey failed to ensure full and non-discriminatory implementation of the Additional Protocol 
to the EU-Turkey Association Agreement and the removal of all the obstacles to the free 
movement of goods, including restrictions on direct transport links with Cyprus. There was no 
progress on normalising bilateral relations with the Republic of Cyprus and the informal talks 
in April 2021 failed to pave the way for the resumption of formal negotiations.  
The March 2021 and the June 2021 European Council recalled the European Union’s strategic 
interest in a stable and secure environment in the Eastern Mediterranean and in the 
development of a cooperative and mutually beneficial relationship with Turkey. In light of the 
discontinuation of illegal drilling activities, the resumption of bilateral talks between Greece 
and Turkey and the forthcoming, at that time, talks on the Cyprus problem under the auspices 
of the United Nations, the leaders offered to nurture a more positive dynamic in EU-Turkey 
relations. To this end, they expressed readiness to engage with Turkey in a phased, 
proportionate and reversible manner in a number of areas of common interest, subject to 
Turkey meeting the established conditionalities set out in previous European Council 
conclusions, and provided that the de-escalation in the Eastern Mediterranean is sustained. 
The leaders called on Turkey to abstain from renewed provocations or unilateral actions in 
breach of international law. Taking into account the Joint Communication, they reaffirmed the 
determination of the European Union, in case of such action, to use the instruments and 
options at its disposal to defend its interests and those of its Member States as well as to 
uphold regional stability. 
Turkey continued to assert the validity of the Turkish-Libyan maritime delimitation and 
military agreements of 2019. The EU considers this an infringement of the sovereign rights of 
third States, not complying with the Law of the Sea and having no legal consequences for 
third States.  
Regarding the economic criteria, the Turkish economy is well advanced, but made no 
progress over the reporting period and serious concerns persist over its functioning. The 
authorities issued a sizeable and wide-ranging set of measures to boost domestic demand and 
soften the economic repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, the economy 
rebounded quickly from the crisis, reaching pre-crisis levels already in the third quarter of 
2020. Amid a strong policy response to the crisis, institutional and policy coordination 
weaknesses undermined the credibility and effectiveness of authorities’ actions and the 
imbalances increased. The macroeconomic policy mix relied too heavily on the credit 
channel, while direct fiscal support measures were rather limited in view of the magnitude of 
the social and labour market challenges. The strong monetary expansion last year weakened 
 
8 
 
the lira, increased inflation and dollarization, and triggered portfolio outflows. The closing of 
the current account deficit in 2019 turned out to be short-lived and external imbalances 
remain a major vulnerability. Monetary policy tightened in autumn 2020 but the abrupt 
dismissal of the central bank governor in March 2021, only four months after his 
appointment, stirred financial market instability and called into question the authorities’ 
commitment to reducing inflation. 
The institutional and regulatory environment weakened further and there are persistent issues 
with the predictability, transparency, and implementation of regulations. Market exit remained 
costly and slow. The informal sector declined during the crisis but still accounts for a large 
part of the economy. State intervention in price setting mechanisms persists. The provision of 
State aid lacks proper rules on implementation, enforcement and transparency. Supported by 
loose monetary policy until the autumn 2020 and favourable regulatory measures, bank 
lending grew strongly, spurred in particular by state-owned banks. The banking sector 
remained well capitalised, benefiting from regulatory forbearance and other crisis-mitigation 
measures. The pandemic had a deeply negative impact on the labour market and on poverty. 
The number of discouraged workers increased significantly and employment levels fell far 
below from where they were a few years ago. Female labour market participation and 
employment remained at particularly low levels. The proportion of young people not in 
employment, education or training increased. 
Turkey made limited progress and has a good level of preparation in achieving the capacity to 
cope with the competitive pressure and market forces within the EU. Despite some progress 
made in improving access to education, the mismatch between the education system and 
labour market needs persists. Expenditure on research and development continued increasing 
at a slow pace, but remained well below the government’s target. Supported by favourable 
financing conditions and concessional lending, investment activity rebounded in 2020. 
Progress was made with regard to the diversification of energy supplies and the development 
of the renewable energy sector. The extension of local content requirement practices 
continued to raise concerns. The relative share of the EU in Turkey’s foreign trade slightly 
increased, despite extensive deviations by Turkey from its obligations under the EU-Turkey 
Customs Union. 
Regarding its ability to assume the obligations of membership, Turkey’s alignment with 
the EU acquis was very limited and pursued on a rather ad hoc basis. 
The internal market cluster is key to the good functioning of the Customs Union and to 
integrating Turkey in the EU’s single market. Turkey has achieved a good level of preparation 
for the free movement of goods. Although it continued to align with technical EU legislation 
under the ‘New and Global Approach’, technical barriers to trade remain, which hamper the 
good functioning of the Customs Union. Preparations in the areas of freedom of movement 
for workers and right of establishment and freedom to provide services are at an early stage as 
many professions are closed to EU nationals. Turkey is moderately prepared on free 
movement of capital notably because of the substantial remaining obstacles for acquisitions of 
assets and real estate. It improved its legal framework regulating the fight against money 
laundering and terrorism financing. It has reached a good level of preparation in terms of the 
legislative alignment of consumer and health protection, as exemplified by Turkey’s strong 
vaccination campaign against COVID-19. However, in both areas, there is a need to 
strengthen administrative capacity, consultations and coordination among stakeholders. 
Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of competition policy. There is a continued 
lack of State aid implementation rules, enforcement and transparency, while the institutional 
set up remains incomplete. In the cluster on competitiveness and inclusive growth, there has 
been mostly backsliding on the economic-related chapters. This was notably the case on 
 
9 
 
enterprise and industrial policy, mainly due to Turkey bringing in measures incompatible with 
EU industrial policy principles, and on economic and monetary policy, reflecting intensified 
political pressure on the central bank. There was also backsliding in the area of social policy 
and employment, linked to the curtailment of trade union rights, the lack of genuine social 
dialogue and persistent levels of informal economic activity. On taxation, while Turkey is 
moderately prepared, there is a need for a clear strategy, avoiding frequent changes in tax 
rates and enabling tax information exchange with all EU Member States. Turkey maintains a 
good level of preparation for the customs union but made limited progress, including in its 
implementation. Turkey’s deviations from its obligations under the EU-Turkey Customs 
Union continue, contributing to a high number of trade irritants. Turkey has some level of 
preparation in the area of information society and media. It continued backsliding, mostly due 
to inadequate competition, concentration of media ownership and the lack of independence of 
regulatory authorities. Turkey’s preparations in the area of science and research are well 
advanced and it continued to implement the action plan to boost the national research and 
innovation capacity and to align with the European Research Area (ERA). Turkey is 
moderately prepared on education and culture, and needs to further improve inclusive 
education, with a particular focus on girls and children from disadvantaged groups. 
Regarding the cluster on the Green Agenda and Sustainable Connectivity, Turkey is 
moderately prepared in transport and energy policies. It has made some progress on energy 
and transport networks, with the construction of the Halkali-Kapikule railway line connecting 
the Bulgarian border to Istanbul continuing. Turkey has some level of preparation on 
environmental and climate change and faces critical environmental and climate challenges, 
both as regards mitigation and adaptation. It made some progress, including the ratification of 
the Paris Agreement on climate change and increasing capacity in waste management, 
wastewater treatment and on legislative alignment, but enforcement and implementation 
remain weak. Turkey needs to follow up with an enhanced nationally determined contribution 
under the Paris Agreement, long-term strategic decarbonisation and adaptation plans and 
appropriate legislation reflecting them domestically. . 
On the cluster covering resources, agriculture and cohesion, Turkey reached some level of 
preparation in the area of agriculture and rural development. However, there was backsliding  
over the reporting period, as its agricultural policy diverged from the main principles of the 
EU common agricultural policy. Turkey is a major exporter of food products to the EU, and 
made limited progress in the area of food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy. Turkey 
needs to make further progress on meeting EU standards, particularly on pesticide residues. It 
made good progress on fisheries in implementing the fisheries law, resources and fleet 
management, and inspection and control. Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of 
regional policy and the coordination of structural instruments. Overall, it made some progress 
in this area, especially in accelerating the absorption of IPA II funds and in addressing some 
structural weaknesses. Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of financial and 
budgetary provisions and made limited progress during the reporting period to strengthen 
administrative capacity or to design implementing rules for the correct application of the own 
resources system. 
Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of external relations, notably due to the continuing 
deviations from the Common Customs Tariff and the common commercial policy. It made 
limited progress in the reporting period, when it successfully concluded a trade agreement 
with the UK after the EU-UK agreement. Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of 
foreign, security and defence policy. There was backsliding in the framework of political 
dialogue on foreign and security policy as Turkey’s increasingly assertive foreign policy 
collided with the EU priorities under the common foreign and security policy. 
 
10 
 
Overall, in many areas further significant efforts are needed on legislative alignment with the 
EU acquis. In all areas, implementation and enforcement needs substantial improvement. 
Ensuring the independence of regulatory authorities and developing administrative capacity 
are key for Turkey to achieve further progress. 
2. 
CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS  
2.1. 
       Functioning of democratic institutions and Public Administration   Reform  
2.1.1. Democracy 
There are serious deficiencies in the functioning of Turkey’s democratic institutions. 
Democratic backsliding as well as deep political polarisation continued during the reporting 
period. Structural deficiencies of the presidential system remained in place. Despite ending 
the state of emergency in July 2018, certain legal provisions granting extraordinary powers to 
government authorities and retaining several restrictive elements of the emergency rule 
remained integrated into law. In July 2021, Turkey's Parliament approved a bill that extends 
the duration of these restrictive elements of the state of emergency for one more year. The 
Inquiry Commission on the State of Emergency has not yet finalised the examination of its 
caseload concerning the public servants who were dismissed by decree during the emergency 
rule. This prevented them from launching appeal procedures. 
Elections 
No elections were held in the reporting period. In the south-east, mayors, elected in 2019 and 
forcefully dismissed, continued to be replaced by government-appointed trustees, which is a 
source of significant concern as it undermines local democracy and denies citizens their 
chosen representation. The new human rights action plan foresees changes to the legislation 
on political parties and elections, which provides an opportunity to bring Turkish legislation 
in line with international obligations and standards for conducting democratic elections. 
Turkey needs to take steps to improve the broader environment for elections.  
The legal framework for elections and political parties remains problematic and needs to be 
aligned with the outstanding recommendations of the Office for Democratic Institutions and 
Human Rights (ODIHR) and the Venice Commission. Turkey also needs to address broader 
questions with regard to democratic media plurality and provide equal and fair conditions to 
all political parties and candidates.  
The human rights action plan announced in March 2021 foresees changes to the legislation 
on political parties and elections. This represents an important opportunity as past elections 
were marked by undue restrictions of certain fundamental freedoms, including the right to 
vote and be elected and the freedom of expression. Turkey should introduce key amendments 
to the election legislation with proper consultation, which would provide stability of the legal 
framework in line with international good practice.  
In the south-east, 48 mayors had been forcefully dismissed and replaced by government-
appointed trustees, denying citizens their chosen representation. No steps were taken to 
address the June 2020 opinion of the Venice Commission, according to which decisions to 
deny mayoral mandates to HDP candidates who received the highest number of votes at the 
municipal elections of March 2019 in six municipalities and to give these mandates to second-
placed AKP candidates, were deemed not consistent with international norms and standards, 
and should be reversed. The Venice Commission further emphasised that, while the removal 
of elected officials may exceptionally be justified by the need to prevent officials from