3 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1 CONTEXT 
Türkiye1 remains a key partner for the European Union and a candidate country. Türkiye has 
been linked to the EU by an association agreement since 1964 and a Customs Union was 
established in 1995. The European Council granted Türkiye the status of candidate country in 
December 1999 and accession negotiations were opened in October 2005. Within the 
framework of accession negotiations, 16 chapters have been opened and one has been 
provisionally closed. Accession negotiations with Türkiye, however, remain at a standstill, in 
line with the Council Conclusions of June 2018 as reiterated by the Council Conclusions of 
December 2022. Türkiye continued to move away from the EU and did not reverse the 
negative trend in relation to reform, despite its repeated statements of commitment to EU 
accession. The EU’s serious concerns on the continued deterioration of democratic standards, 
the rule of law, the independence of the judiciary and respect for fundamental rights were not 
addressed.  
Presidential and parliamentary elections were held in Türkiye in May 2023. The ruling 
coalition retained its majority in the parliament and the incumbent President was re-elected. 
The priorities of the new government include post-earthquake relief and reconstruction, 
financial stability and a constitutional overhaul. 
In February 2023, two powerful earthquakes and multiple aftershocks struck south-eastern 
Türkiye. The devastating earthquakes caused the death of tens of thousands of people and 
resulted in widespread destruction of public and private infrastructure, including schools and 
healthcare facilities. The EU’s reaction was immediate and substantial emergency assistance 
was provided both through humanitarian funding and the EU Civil Protection Mechanism. In 
March 2023, the European Commission and the Swedish Presidency of the Council of the EU 
hosted, in coordination with the Turkish authorities, an international donors’ conference to 
mobilise funds from the international community to support the early recovery, relief and 
reconstruction of the affected areas. This conference raised more than EUR 6 billion. The 
implementation of the assistance pledged by the European Commission has begun. 
The EU has a strategic interest in a stable and secure environment in the Eastern 
Mediterranean and in the development of a cooperative and mutually beneficial relationship 
with Türkiye. The European Council in June 2022 reconfirmed its expectation that Türkiye 
fully respects international law, contributes to the de-escalation of tensions in the interest of 
regional stability in the Eastern Mediterranean and promotes good-neighbourly relations in a 
sustainable way. The European Council in June 2023 invited the High Representative and the 
Commission to submit a report to the European Council on the state of play of EU-Türkiye 
relations, building on the instruments and options identified by the European Council and 
with a view to proceeding in a strategic and forward-looking manner. The Foreign Affairs 
Council discussed Türkiye in July 2023. 
During the reporting period, Türkiye did not engage in any unauthorised drilling activities in 
the Eastern Mediterranean. It continued to refuse to recognise the Republic of Cyprus and 
repeatedly advocated a two-state solution in Cyprus, contrary to relevant UN Security 
Council Resolutions. 
 
1 In line with the request of the Republic of Türkiye regarding the use of the country's new official name in 
English, this document uses the name “Türkiye” instead of “Turkey” in English. This administrative change is 
limited to the nomenclature used in EU documents, does not have a retroactive effect, and entails no legal 
consequences. This approach is without prejudice to the nomenclature used by Member States. 
 
4 
 
The 2016 EU-Turkey Statement continued to yield results and remained the key framework 
for cooperation on migration. Türkiye sustained its remarkable efforts to host 3.6 million 
refugees from Syria and other countries. The EU has mobilised close to EUR 10 billion to 
support refugees and host communities since 2012. The Commission continued to implement 
the additional package of EUR 3 billion covering 2021-2023, providing assistance in areas 
such as basic needs, border management, education, healthcare, protection and socio-
economic support.  
1.2. SUMMARY OF THE REPORT 2 
There are serious deficiencies in the functioning of Türkiye’s democratic institutions. 
Democratic backsliding continued during the reporting period. Structural deficiencies in the 
presidential system remained in place.  
Presidential and parliamentary elections took place on 14 May 2023. A second round of the 
presidential election was held on 28 May. The elections were held under the new electoral 
law adopted in March 2022. The elections offered voters a choice between genuine political 
alternatives and voter participation remained high, but biased media coverage and the lack of 
a level playing field gave an unjustified advantage to the incumbent. 
The constitutional architecture kept powers centralised at the level of the Presidency and does 
not ensure a sound and effective separation of powers between the executive, the legislature 
and the judiciary. The ineffective checks-and-balances mechanism means that the executive 
branch is democratically accountable only through elections.  
Political pluralism continued to be undermined by the targeting of opposition parties and 
individual members of parliament. The government’s pressure on mayors from opposition 
parties continued to weaken local democracy. Most regulatory authorities remain directly 
linked to the Presidency. The recommendations by the Council of Europe’s Venice 
Commission on the presidential system remain unaddressed. 
The situation in the south-east region remained a cause for concern, particularly after the 
earthquakes in February 2023. The Turkish government conducted security and military 
operations in Iraq and Syria. Border areas faced a security risk with terrorist attacks by the 
Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), which is listed as a terrorist group by the EU. The 
government has a legitimate right and a responsibility to fight terrorism, but it is essential that 
it does so in full compliance with the principles of the rule of law, human rights and 
fundamental freedoms. Anti-terror measures need to be proportionate. There was no progress 
in resuming a credible political peace process to resolve the Kurdish issue. Following the 
earthquakes, the Kurdistan Communities Union (KCK) declared a period of unilateral truce, 
during the run-up to the May elections, which was terminated in June. Turkish officials 
linked the PKK-affiliated People’s Protection Units (YPG) to an attack in Istanbul in 
November 2022, but the PKK denied involvement. The EU unambiguously condemned the 
PKK’s attacks and expressed solidarity with the families of the victims. Türkiye continued to 
carry out airstrikes against the PKK and affiliated groups in northern Syria and Iraq. 
 
2 This report covers the period from June 2022 to June 2023. It is based on input from a variety of sources, 
including contributions from the government of Türkiye, the EU Member States, European Parliament reports 
and information from various international and non-governmental organisations. It also includes the results of 
comparative assessments and indices produced by other stakeholders, in particular in the area of rule of law. 
The report uses the following assessment scale to describe the state of play: early stage, some level of 
preparation, moderately prepared, good level of preparation and well advanced. To describe progress made 
during the reporting period, it uses the following scale: backsliding, no progress, limited progress, some 
progress, good progress and very good progress. Where appropriate, interim steps have also been used. 
 
5 
 
Serious backsliding regarding civil society issues continued. Civil society organisations faced 
increased pressure and shrinking space to operate , limiting their freedoms of expression, 
association and assembly. The implementation of the Law on preventing financing of 
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction placed further restrictions on civil society 
organisations. However, despite increasing pressure from the authorities, civil society 
continued to be vocal and to participate actively in civic life, including by providing support 
to the people affected by the February 2023 earthquakes. 
Civilian oversight of the security forces was not consolidated. The executive branch 
maintained significant control over the security forces. The civilian component of the 
Supreme Military Council (YAŞ) remained unchanged. The military judicial system’s 
authority was curbed, with civilian higher courts reviewing appeals against military court 
decisions. However, effective civilian oversight of the security forces remained incomplete 
and lacking in effective accountability mechanisms. Strengthening parliamentary oversight of 
security institutions is necessary. 
Türkiye is in between some and moderate level of preparation in the field of public 
administration reform. It made no progress in this area over the reporting period. There is 
still a lack of political will to reform the public administration and public financial 
management. The restructuring of the executive branch and the overhaul of the public 
administration in line with the presidential system introduced in 2018 resulted in highly 
centralised policymaking system. The level of accountability of the administration remains 
insufficient. Its human resources management system needs to be reformed. Politicisation of 
the public administration has continued. The share of women in managerial posts in the civil 
service is still low.  
Türkiye remains at an early stage of preparation in the area of judiciary. Serious backsliding 
continued and, despite several judicial reform packages in recent years, the structural 
deficiencies in the judicial system remained unaddressed. The continued refusal to implement 
certain rulings of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) remains a matter of concern. 
There was no progress in eliminating undue influence and pressure by the executive on 
judges and prosecutors, which negatively affects the independence, impartiality and quality 
of the judiciary. Implementation of the 2021 Human Rights Action Plan (HRAP) and the 
2019 Judicial Reform Strategy (JRS) continued, but the activities foreseen in these 
documents fell short of addressing the structural problems and issues identified in the 
previous reports of the European Commission. The lack of objective, merit-based, uniform 
and pre-established criteria for recruiting and promoting judges and prosecutors remains a 
source of concern.  
Türkiye is at an early stage in the fight against corruption. There was no progress in the 
reporting period. Outstanding deficiencies in key areas of the fight against corruption over the 
last years remained unaddressed. A fully-fledged corruption prevention policy still remains to 
be developed, including the relevant institutions, contrary to the United Nations Convention 
against Corruption, to which Türkiye is party. Legislative gaps still remain in several fields of 
the fight against corruption. The limitations of the legal framework and the institutional 
architecture allowed undue influence on the investigation and prosecution phases of 
corruption cases. The accountability and transparency of public institutions need to be 
improved. The absence of an anti-corruption strategy and action plan indicates the lack of 
will to fight decisively against corruption. The Council of Europe’s Group of States against 
Corruption (GRECO) recommendations remained unimplemented. Overall, corruption 
remains a problem.  
 
6 
 
Türkiye has some level of preparation in the fight against organised crime and there was 
some progress at operational level through participation in an increasing number of joint 
operations with EU Member States and neighbouring countries. Nevertheless, it is important 
for Türkiye to further increase its operational willingness to cooperate and exchange 
information with EU law enforcement partners. The legal framework for the fight against 
organised crime and police cooperation is only partially aligned with the EU acquis. The 
completion of an international agreement between the EU and Türkiye on the exchange of 
personal data between Europol and the Turkish authorities responsible for fighting serious 
crime and terrorism is still pending, considering also that the Turkish data protection 
legislation is still not aligned with the EU acquis. The legal framework regulating the fight 
against money laundering and terrorist financing needs to be improved in line with the 
recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and the Venice Commission on 
the Law on preventing financing of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. 
The deterioration of human and fundamental rights continued. The Turkish legal 
framework includes general guarantees of respect for human and fundamental rights, but the 
legislation and its implementation need to be brought into line with the European Convention 
on Human Rights (ECHR) and European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) case law. No 
legislative amendments were adopted to eliminate the remaining elements of the 2016 state of 
emergency laws. 
Türkiye’s refusal to implement certain ECtHR rulings is a source of concern regarding the 
judiciary’s adherence to international and European standards. Türkiye has not implemented 
the July 2022 ruling of the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights, which 
was issued in the framework of the infringement procedure launched by the Committee of 
Ministers against Türkiye, that points to a drifting away from the standards of human rights 
and fundamental freedoms that it has subscribed to as a member of the Council of Europe. 
The implementation of the human rights action plan adopted in 2021 continued. However, it 
did not address critical issues. The overall human rights situation did not improve.  
On freedom of expression, the serious backsliding continued. Broad restrictions on the 
activities of journalists, writers, lawyers, academics, human rights defenders and critical 
voices continued to have a negative effect on the exercise of their freedoms. The 
implementation of the criminal laws relating to national security and anti-terrorism continued 
to contravene the ECHR and to diverge from ECtHR case law.  
The May 2023 election campaign  witnessed restrictions on freedom of expression, both 
private and public media did not ensure editorial independence and impartiality in their 
coverage of the campaign, detracting from the ability of voters to make an informed choice.  
There was no progress in the area of freedom of assembly and association, where legislation 
and its implementation are not in line with the Turkish Constitution, European standards or 
the international conventions that Türkiye is party to. There were recurrent bans, 
disproportionate use of force and interventions around peaceful demonstrations. 
Demonstrators were subject to investigations, court cases and administrative fines on charges 
of terrorism-related activities or of violating the Law on demonstrations and marches. 
The rights of the most disadvantaged groups and people belonging to minorities need better 
protection. Roma3 people are still largely excluded from formal employment and their living 
conditions deteriorated severely. In January 2023, Türkiye adopted a new Roma strategy 
 
3 In line with the terminology of European institutions the umbrella term ‘Roma’ is used here to refer to a 
number of different groups, without denying the specificities of these groups. 
 
7 
 
covering the period 2023-2030 and an action plan covering the period 2023-2025. The 
February 2023 earthquakes affected the Roma population disproportionately, and increased 
the difficulties they faced in the affected areas in terms of living conditions, livelihood and 
basic needs and health, especially for women and children. Gender-based violence, 
discrimination and hate speech against minorities and against lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender, intersex and queer (LGBTIQ) persons are still a matter of serious concern.  
On migration and asylum policy, Türkiye made some progress. The EU-Turkey Statement 
remained the main framework for cooperation between the EU and Türkiye. Some progress 
was made in further strengthening the capacity for surveillance and protection of the land 
borders with Iran and Iraq. The Commission expects Türkiye to uphold its commitments 
under the EU-Turkey statement, in line with the European Council conclusions of October 
2021, including prevention of irregular migration from land and sea routes, and resuming 
returns. The return of irregular migrants from the Greek islands under the EU-Turkey 
Statement remained suspended. The full and effective implementation of the EU-Turkey 
readmission agreement towards all EU Member States is pending. Political and technical 
dialogue is ongoing on migration and security. The next EU-Türkiye high level dialogue on 
migration is scheduled to take place on 23 November 2023. Overall, the number of illegal 
border crossings between Türkiye and Greece remained significantly lower than it was prior 
to the adoption of the EU-Turkey Statement. In 2022, the number of irregular migrants 
arriving increased on most routes by comparison with 2021. In the first half of 2023, the 
number of irregular arrivals from Türkiye into the EU was lower than in the same period in 
2022. Arrivals in Greece increased by 62%, while the sea route to Italy saw a substantial 
decrease (down by 52%) and the number of arrivals in Cyprus via the Green Line went down 
significantly by 42%. Türkiye has still not implemented the provisions relating to third-
country nationals in the EU-Turkey readmission agreement, which entered into force in 
October 2017.  
Türkiye continued to make significant efforts to host and meet the needs of one of the largest 
refugee communities in the world. Out of the almost EUR 10 billion in EU support to 
refugees allocated since 2011, some EUR 7 billion had been disbursed by September 2023. 
Efficient integration measures are needed to address the prolonged presence of refugees in 
the country. Access to public health for migrants and refugees should be improved. No 
outstanding benchmarks under the visa liberalisation roadmap were fulfilled. Türkiye still 
needs to further align its legislation with the EU acquis on visa policy. 
Türkiye is an active and significant actor in the area of foreign policy, which constitutes an 
important element in the context of the EU-Türkiye relationship. Nevertheless, Türkiye’s 
unilateral foreign policy remained at odds with the EU’s priorities under the common foreign 
and security policy (CFSP). Türkiye maintained a very low alignment rate of 10% with the 
EU stance on foreign and security policy (as of August 2023), compared to 8% in 2022. Its 
rhetoric in support to terrorist group Hamas following its attacks against Israel on 7 October 
2023 is in complete disagreement with the EU approach. 
Following Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, Türkiye condemned the Russian 
military aggression, including at the UN General Assembly, and engaged politically and 
diplomatically, including by facilitating the export of Ukrainian grain and the exchange of 
prisoners. The UN- and Türkiye-brokered Black Sea Grain Initiative was terminated by 
Russia in July 2023. Türkiye also sought to facilitate talks between Ukraine and Russia and to 
work on de-escalation and bringing about a cease-fire. Nevertheless, Türkiye refrained from 
aligning itself with the EU’s restrictive measures against Russia. As of March 2023, Türkiye 
has implemented a ban on exporting to Russia sanctioned goods originating from the EU, the 
 
8 
 
United States and the United Kingdom. This ban specifically targeted goods that were in 
transit, stored in warehouses or located within free zones in Türkiye. However, the potential 
transportation of dual-use and sensitive technology goods, as well as the unrestricted 
movement of sanctioned goods from Türkiye to Russia still need to be addressed. Overall, 
Türkiye significantly intensified its trade and economic ties with Russia, and the Turkish 
economy became more dependent on Russia in crucial sectors, particularly in energy. 
Türkiye intensified its ‘regional normalisation’ policy with the Arab states, with Armenia and 
with Israel. Following the Hamas terrorist group’s attacks against Israel in October 2023, 
Türkiye refrained from condemning and qualifying them as terrorism and strongly criticised 
Israel’s response. Türkiye strongly condemned the loss of civilian lives on both sides and 
proposed to act as a mediator between Israel and Hamas. Türkiye is currently re-evaluating 
its ties with Israel. On the Middle East Peace Process (MEPP), Türkiye’s position aligns with 
the EU’s position supporting the two-state solution. Türkiye's rapprochement with the Syrian 
regime, brokered by Russia, occurred in spite of the lack of a political resolution to the Syrian 
conflict and is at odds with the EU’s policy. At the same time, Türkiye shared a common goal 
with the EU to achieve a stable and prosperous Syria, primarily by implementing UNSCR 
2254. Türkiye has a growing presence and geopolitical ambition in the South Caucasus and 
Central Asia. It also continued its efforts to extend its relations with African, Latin American 
and Asian countries. Türkiye’s pragmatic engagement on Afghanistan and its vocal position 
on the developments in Sudan underscored its ambition to be a key player in the context of 
major international crises. 
Türkiye continued to seek involvement in the common security and defence policy (CSDP) 
and EU defence initiatives while persisting in its exclusion of a Member State from all 
possible cooperation with NATO. Türkiye remained actively involved in EU crisis 
management missions and operations within the framework of the CSDP. In March 2023, the 
Turkish National Assembly approved Finland’s NATO accession and during the NATO 
summit in July 2023, the Turkish President pledged to promptly submit Sweden’s accession 
protocol to the Turkish parliament for ratification. The president submitted the bill for 
ratification to the Parliament on 23 October 2023. 
Regarding good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation, Türkiye continued to 
refuse to recognise the Republic of Cyprus and repeatedly advocated a two-state solution in 
Cyprus, contrary to relevant UN Security Council Resolutions. The EU remains fully 
committed to a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus problem within the UN framework, 
in accordance with the relevant UNSC resolutions, in line with the principles on which the 
EU is founded and the acquis. The EU has called, most recently in the European Council 
conclusions of June 2023, for the speedy resumption of negotiations and expressed its 
readiness to play an active role in supporting all stages of the UN-led process with all 
appropriate means at its disposal. There were no unauthorised drilling activities by Türkiye in 
the Eastern Mediterranean during the reporting period. 
Relations between Türkiye and Greece deteriorated until early 2023. However, following the 
devastating earthquakes in Türkiye in February 2023, there was a marked improvement in the 
relations. As of February 2023, violations of Greek airspace diminished drastically, and no 
flights over Greek inhabited areas were reported.  
Pursuing dialogue in good faith and abstaining from unilateral actions which run counter to 
the EU interests and violate international law and the sovereign rights of EU Member States 
is an essential requirement to ensure stable and secure environment in the Eastern 
Mediterranean and  the development of a cooperative and mutually beneficial relationship 
between the EU and Türkiye. Türkiye is expected to unequivocally commit itself to good 
 
9 
 
neighbourly relations, international agreements and the peaceful settlement of disputes, in 
accordance with the United Nations Charter, having recourse, if necessary, to the 
International Court of Justice.  
Regarding the economic criteria, the Turkish economy is well advanced but made no 
progress over the reporting period. Serious concerns persist over the proper functioning of 
Türkiye’s market economy. There was backsliding on important elements, such as the 
conduct of monetary policy and the institutional and regulatory environments over most of 
the reporting period. Since the May parliamentary and presidential elections, the authorities 
have taken some steps to revert to more stability oriented macroeconomic policies. Although 
economic growth remained robust in 2022, Türkiye moved further away from market-
oriented policies, which weakened its economic fundamentals and increased vulnerabilities 
and risks. Inflation decreased somewhat but remained very high as monetary policy 
prioritised exceptionally low interest rates, which remain deeply negative in real terms and 
are sustained by a web of regulatory and prudential measures. After the presidential and 
parliamentary elections in spring 2023, monetary policy has started to tighten, also signalling 
a gradual simplification of the macroprudential framework. The current account deficit 
increased to 5.4% of GDP in 2022, driven by a negative terms-of-trade shock and large 
imports of non-monetary gold. The relatively good budget performance in recent years masks 
an underlying trend of growing fiscal risks. The authorities’ commitment to fiscal discipline 
wavered, as the fiscal stance turned pro-cyclical in 2023, with earthquake-related expenditure 
pressure adding to pre-electoral budgetary largesse. However, the fiscal stance was tightened 
after the elections and a revised budget, including sizeable tax increases, was adopted in July. 
The institutional and regulatory environment lacks predictability and transparency, and 
complicates the post-electoral economic policy normalisation. Market exit remains costly and 
slow. However, Türkiye has made progress in digitalising government services to businesses. 
Although the size of the informal economy has fallen in recent years, it still accounts for a 
significant share of economic activity. State intervention in price-setting mechanisms persists. 
The provision of State aid lacks proper implementation rules, enforcement and transparency. 
The banking sector remained broadly stable but is facing financial stability challenges due to 
the numerous overly complex and far-reaching macroprudential and regulatory measures. 
The labour market strengthened further, although structural challenges remain significant, in 
particular for youth and female employment. Regional labour market disparities declined and 
reached one of the lowest levels in years. The recent net minimum wage increases were pro-
cyclical. 
Türkiye has a good level of preparation and made limited progress in achieving the capacity 
to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the EU. Despite improved 
vocational training, the mismatch between the education system and labour market needs 
remains a concern. Expenditure on research and development continued to increase, albeit at 
a very slow pace, and is still below the government’s target. Investment was relatively 
subdued in 2022. There was progress in the diversification of energy supplies and the share of 
energy generated from renewable sources increased significantly. However, the local content 
requirement in the renewable energy generation sector is a discriminatory practice and a 
cause for concern. Trade openness increased further, but integration with the EU continued 
falling, although remaining high. Deviations from Türkiye’s obligations under the EU-Turkey 
Customs Union continue to hinder bilateral trade. 
Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of public procurement, with significant gaps 
remaining to align with the EU acquis. There was backsliding in the reporting period as 
Türkiye increased the use of the negotiated procedure and of discriminatory domestic price 
 
10 
 
advantage practices, and continued to allow offsets that favour local content. Türkiye is 
moderately prepared on statistics and made some progress, with work continuing to 
harmonise its statistical methodology with EU standards. The Turkish Statistical Institute 
(TurkStat) improved its compliance with the timeframes for publishing annual national 
accounts and excessive deficit procedure notifications. It took further steps to improve 
cooperation with other main data providers. However, Türkiye needs to increase the 
credibility of TurkStat and public trust in official statistics. Türkiye has a good level of 
preparation on financial control. It made no progress over the reporting period. The public 
internal financial control policy paper was not updated. The purpose, authority and 
responsibility of internal audit are undermined by the lack of a legal requirement to have 
internal audit units in ministries. 
Regarding its ability to assume the obligations of membership, Türkiye has pursued 
alignment with the EU acquis on a rather ad hoc basis and to a limited degree. 
The internal market cluster is key to the good functioning of the EU-Turkey Customs 
Union and to integrating Türkiye into the EU’s internal market. Türkiye has achieved a good 
level of preparation for the free movement of goods. However, technical barriers to trade and 
requirements discriminating against EU products remained in place. Preparations in the areas 
of freedom of movement for workers, the right of establishment and freedom to provide 
services are at an early stage, and substantial efforts are still required to align with the 
acquis. Türkiye is moderately prepared on free movement of capital, as limitations remain on 
foreign ownership and on capital movement. Türkiye needs to continue to address 
outstanding issues in its framework regulating the fight against money laundering and 
terrorist financing.  
Türkiye is well advanced in the area of company law but needs to make further progress in 
aligning with the EU acquis. Türkiye has a good level of preparation in the area of 
intellectual property law, notably in terms of legislative alignment, but it needs to improve 
implementation and enforcement. Türkiye has some level of preparation in the area of 
competition policy. Backsliding was observed as serious concerns persist in relation to the 
legislative framework, enforcement capacity and transparency in the field of State aid. 
Türkiye has a good level of preparation in the area of financial services, however the 
banking sector faced a challenging operating environment in the reporting period. Türkiye 
has a good level of preparation on consumer and health protection, with limited progress 
made, notably on strengthening its surveillance system for health (security) services. The 
capacity of the healthcare system was seriously affected by the February 2023 earthquakes in  
south-east Türkiye. 
Within the cluster on competitiveness and inclusive growth, Türkiye has some level  of 
preparation in the area of digital transformation and media. Türkiye’s preparations in the 
area of science and research are well advanced and Türkiye made good progress during the 
reporting period, notably as a result of joining Horizon Europe and continued efforts to raise 
awareness of, and capacity for the programme. Türkiye is moderately prepared on education 
and culture, and continued to make some progress, notably through the continued 
implementation of the national qualifications system and the increased participation in some 
EU programmes. Access to education in south-east Türkiye was significantly impacted by 
the February 2023 earthquakes. 
On the economy-related chapters, backsliding continued on economic and monetary policy, 
where Türkiye has some level of preparation. The Central Bank continued to loosen its 
unorthodox monetary policy stance, which triggered multi-year high inflation and unhinged 
inflation expectations. Until the parliamentary and presidential elections in May 2023, the 
 
11 
 
Central Bank was subject to significant political pressure to keep real interest rates deeply 
negative. Far-reaching prudential and regulatory measures disrupted the functioning of 
financial markets and increased risks. After the elections, the Central Bank has started to 
tighten monetary policy and the new government took measures to limit the bulging fiscal 
deficit. Türkiye is moderately prepared and made limited progress on enterprise and 
industrial policy. Major challenges in relation to measures incompatible with EU industrial 
policy principles remain unaddressed. Türkiye has some level of preparation in the area of 
social policy and employment. The labour market situation improved but concerns remain 
over trade union rights and effective social dialogue, persistent levels of informal economic 
activity and the gender gap in employment. The February 2023 earthquakes had a major 
impact on the labour market in the affected regions. 
Türkiye is moderately prepared on taxation. It made no progress during the reporting period 
and still needs to enable tax information exchange with all EU Member States. Türkiye 
maintains a good level of preparation for the customs union but made limited progress over 
the reporting period. However, Türkiye’s deviations from its obligations under the EU-
Turkey Customs Union continued, contributing to a number of trade irritants. 
Regarding the cluster on the Green Agenda and sustainable connectivity, Türkiye is 
moderately prepared in transport policy. It made limited progress during the reporting period, 
mainly linked to the update of the nationally determined contribution under the Paris 
Agreement with a specific chapter on transport mitigation policies. Türkiye is moderately 
prepared in the area of energy, and made limited progress overall. Efforts continued on 
renewable energy deployment, reforms in the natural gas sector and legislative alignment on 
nuclear safety. Türkiye continues to be an important transit country for the EU, but remains 
reliant on Russia for fossil fuel imports and nuclear energy. Türkiye is well advanced on 
trans-European networks and made no progress. The trans-Anatolian pipeline continues to 
operate smoothly and transmit gas to the European section of the Southern Gas Corridor. The 
construction of the flagship Halkali-Kapikule railway line connecting the EU border to 
Istanbul continued. 
Türkiye has some level of preparation in the area of environment and climate change, and 
made limited progress over the reporting period. On climate change, Türkiye submitted its 
updated nationally determined contribution under the Paris Agreement. It faces critical 
environmental and climate challenges, and needs more ambitious and better coordinated 
environment and climate policies, strategic planning, substantial investment and stronger 
administrative capacity. 
On the cluster covering resources, agriculture and cohesion, Türkiye reached some level 
of preparation in the area of agriculture and rural development. Backsliding continued during 
the reporting period, as its agricultural policy keeps moving away from the main principles 
of the EU common agricultural policy and as Türkiye continued to restrict imports of 
agricultural products from the EU. Türkiye is a major exporter of food products to the EU 
and made limited progress in the area of food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy, 
where it reached some level of preparation. Full implementation of the EU acquis in this area 
requires significant further work. Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of fisheries and 
aquaculture, and made some progress on fisheries governance, inspection and control. 
Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of regional policy and the coordination of 
structural instruments, and continued to make some progress in accelerating the absorption 
of IPA II funds and setting up the structures for IPA III funds. Türkiye has some level of 
preparation in the area of financial and budgetary provisions but made no progress during the 
reporting period. 
 
12 
 
In the external relations cluster, Türkiye is moderately prepared in the area of external 
relations and made no progress over the reporting period. Türkiye has some level of 
preparation in the area of foreign, security and defence policy, and made no progress overall 
in the reporting period. Türkiye is a significant actor in the area of foreign policy, which 
constitutes an important element in the context of the EU-Türkiye relationship. Stepping up 
efforts to ensure alignment with the EU's common foreign and security policy would be a 
significant signal of Türkiye's commitment to the EU in the new geopolitical context. 
 
2. CLUSTER 1: THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACCESSION PROCESS 
2.1. FUNCTIONING OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION REFORM 
Democracy 
The functioning of Türkiye’s democratic institutions continued to be severely hampered. The 
structural shortcomings of the presidential system remained. Democratic backsliding and 
political polarisation increased in the run-up to the presidential and parliamentary elections. 
Following the earthquakes, which hit 11 provinces in February 2023, a state of emergency 
was introduced in the affected provinces and expired in May 2023. Furthermore, even though 
the nationwide state of emergency was lifted in July 2018, a number of legal provisions 
granting extraordinary powers to government officials and maintaining a number of the 
emergency’s restrictive elements remain in effect. Some of these provisions have been 
extended for another 2 years, but most of the provisions related to the 2018 state of 
emergency expired in July 2022. 
The State of Emergency Inquiry Commission ruled on all the applications within the scope of 
the 2018 Law on the establishment of the Inquiry Commission on the State of Emergency 
Measures and completed its work in January 2023. Of the total number of applications 
submitted to the Inquiry Commission (127 292), the Inquiry Commission accepted 17 960 
cases and rejected 109 332. 
Elections 
Presidential and parliamentary elections took place on 14 May 2023. A second round to 
determine the new President of the Republic was held on 28 May. According to the 
preliminary conclusions of the OSCE’s Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights 
(the ODIHR), which deployed an election observation mission, voters had a choice between 
genuine political alternatives and voter participation was high. However, the incumbent-
biased media coverage and the lack of a level playing field gave an unjustified advantage to 
the incumbent. 
Parliamentary elections were held in Türkiye on 14 May 2023 to elect the 600 members of 
the Grand National Assembly. The governing Justice and Development Party (AKP) of the 
incumbent President, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, led the People’s Alliance, which also included 
the Nationalist Movement Party (MHP), the Great Union Party (BBP) and the New Welfare 
Party (YRP). The People’s Alliance retained its majority in the parliament with 322 members 
of parliament. During the second round of the presidential elections on 28 May, President 
Erdoğan was re-elected with 52.18% of the vote (the Republic People’s Party CHP 
opposition candidate Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu received 47.82%). The elections took place in a 
deeply polarised environment. The elections offered voters a choice between genuine 
political alternatives and voter participation remained high, however, biased media coverage 
and the lack of a level playing field gave an unjustified advantage to the incumbent. In the